Disruptions in the gene encoding methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MECP2) underlie complex neurodevelopmental disorders including Rett Syndrome (RTT), MECP2 duplication disorder, intellectual disabilities, and autism. Significant progress has been made on the molecular and cellular basis of MECP2 -related disorders providing a new framework for understanding how altered epigenetic landscape can derail the formation and refinement of neuronal circuits in early postnatal life and proper neurological function. This review will summarize selected major findings from the past years and particularly highlight the integrated and multidisciplinary work done at eight NIH-funded Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Centers (IDDRC) across the US. Finally, we will outline a path forward with identification of reliable biomarkers and outcome measures, longitudinal preclinical and clinical studies, reproducibility of results across centers as a synergistic effort to decode and treat the pathogenesis of the complex MeCP2 disorders.
Recent discoveries on the molecular basis of MECP2 -related disorders have provided a new framework for understanding how an altered epigenetic landscape can lead to a variety of neurodevelopmental disorders including Rett Syndrome (RTT), MECP2 duplication disorder, intellectual disabilities and autism. These insights highlight the importance of chromatin regulation in the formation and refinement of neuronal circuits in early postnatal life and in their maintenance for proper adult neurological function.
MECP2 is an X-linked gene that encodes methyl-CpG binding protein 2 (MeCP2), which binds to methylated DNA and regulates gene expression at the local and global level. MeCP2 interacts with multiple proteins including the histone deacetylase co-repressor complexes SIN3A, NCOR and SMRT amongst other chromatin remodeling proteins. In addition, MeCP2 affects chromatin remodeling, alternative splicing and micro-RNA processing. Although present in somatic cells, MeCP2 is most abundant in neuronal cells where its levels are 5- to 10 fold higher than in other cell types, and it has cell-autonomous as well as non-cell-autonomous effects. MeCP2 itself is dynamically regulated in response to neural activity and experience during postnatal life inserting additional layers of complexity to its role in brain maturation and function. MeCP2 affects successive phases of brain development including prenatal neurogenesis, development and refinement of neuronal circuits, and maintenance of adult neural function including sensory integration ( Lyst and Bird, 2015 ).
In 1999, Zoghbi and colleagues reported the exciting discovery that MECP2 mutations cause Rett Syndrome (RTT, Amir et al., 1999 ). Due to X chromosome inactivation, the majority of affected subjects are females who are mosaic for mutated and wild-type MECP2 expression. Males carrying a MECP2 mutation display a more severe phenotype and often do not survive infancy. RTT is characterized by apparently normal early development followed by developmental regression or stagnation that includes progressive loss of acquired motor and language skills, acquisition of stereotyped repetitive hand movement, muscle hypotonia, respiratory dysfunction and severe cognitive impairment. Seizures, anxiety, and orthopedic problems often appear at the end of the regression phase. Duplications spanning MECP2 cause a serious condition known as MECP2 duplication syndrome (MDS) characterized by infantile hypotonia, autistic features, cognitive deficits, gait abnormalities, seizures, and recurrent infections. Mutations of some other genes can cause disorders that share some features of RTT but they are clinically distinct disorders; namely Forkhead Box protein G1 (FOXG1) and Cyclin-Dependent Kinase-Like 5 (CDKL5). These discoveries have enabled the generation of animal models with good construct and face validity and allowed understanding of the neurobiological basis of these three distinct disorders ( Eagleson et al., 2007 ; Siegenthaler et al., 2008 ; Wang et al., 2012a , b ). Research into the neurobiological mechanisms behind RTT and RTT-like disorders has progressed quickly in recent years thanks to the convergence of NIH-funded natural history study, well-established clinics, and basic research in animal models and patient-derived iPSCs.
This review summarizes where MECP2 research currently stands, reviewing selected major findings from the past few years and particularly highlighting work done in NIH-funded Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Centers (IDDRC) across the US. The review also highlights the importance of IDDRC-supported integrated and multidisciplinary approach to understand the pathogenesis of the complex MeCP2 disorders.
There are two aspects to dissecting the MeCP2 function, first understanding what it does at the molecular level, and then identifying its targets. Baker and colleagues from the Baylor college of Medicine (BCM) IDDRC used data from male patients with different mutations and varying severity to develop mouse models and characterize critical domains of the protein. Studying two human mutations that either disrupt the protein at amino acid 270 or 273 allowed them to pinpoint the importance of a new AT-hook domain that is disrupted in the more severe earlier truncation. The discovery of this second AT-hook domain and the homology of MeCP2 to HMGA DNA-bending proteins support a role for MeCP2 in altering chromatin structure ( Baker et al., 2013 ).
In their publication in Biochemistry (2016), lead investigator Michael Brenowitz at Einstein College of Medicine together with IDDRC colleagues Aristea Galanopoulou and John M. Greally have dissected the mechanisms underlying its molecular interaction with DNA and its ability to specifically bind to sites of epigenetic modification. In particular they showed that MeCP2 specificity and cooperativity to DNA binding is sensitive to both the nature of the bound DNA and the concentration and types of surrounding ions whose concentrations change with neuronal development raising the possibility of a novel and direct mechanism by which the function of MeCP2 might be developmentally regulated ( Khrapunov et al., 2014 ).
Over the last two decades, several laboratories have tried to identify transcriptional targets of MeCP2 to gain insight into the etiology of RTT. However, target identification is confounded by the cellular heterogeneity of the brain. The identification of transcriptional targets is also convoluted by the widespread binding patterns of MeCP2 to methylated cytosines, hydroxymethylated cytosines, or unmethylated GC-rich regions throughout the genome ( Connolly and Zhou, 2019 ). Further, although RTT predominantly affects heterozygous females, identifying gene expression changes in neurons lacking functional Mecp2 in a mosaic female brain is another challenge. Only recently, two RNA sequencing studies focused on investigating gene expression changes in murine and human female RTT brains ( Renthal et al., 2018 ; Johnson et al., 2017 ), strengthening the idea that MeCP2 dysfunction alters gene expression changes in a cell-type specific and MeCP2 mutation-specific manner ( Johnson et al., 2017 ).
Greenberg's laboratory uncovered evidence that at genome-wide level, MeCP2 functions to temper the expression of genes in a gene-length-associated manner, possibly by binding to methylated CA sites within long genes. Interestingly, long genes as a population are enriched in neuronal functions and selectively expressed in the brain ( Gabel et al., 2015 ). They provided further evidence that MeCP2 represses transcription by binding within transcribed regions of genes and this repressive effect is proportional to the total number of methylated DNA binding sites for MeCP2 within each gene. These findings suggest a model in which MeCP2 represses transcription of long neuronal genes that contain many methylated binding sites by impeding transcriptional elongation ( Kinde et al., 2016 ). Data from Lin and colleagues also showed enriched binding of MeCP2 on non-CG methylation and a correlation between that binding and gene expression changes. Their data pointed to gene expression changes in both long and short genes and in both directions ( Chen et al., 2015 ). However, a re-analysis of large datasets from different transcriptome profiling technologies has not identified a preferential misregulation of long genes in MeCP2 datasets, suggesting that amplification-based transcriptomic technologies can lead to overestimations of long gene expression changes ( Raman et al., 2018 ). Recently, Greenberg's laboratory reported that in the absence of MeCP2 the process of transcriptional initiation is likely increased especially for genes that are highly methylated and long ( Boxer et al., 2020 ).
Another relevant study from the Zhou laboratory at the IDDRC at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia and University of Pennsylvania (CHOP/Penn) further highlighted that the effects of MeCP2 on gene expression is rather complex. They engineered genetically modified mice whereby nuclear MeCP2 can be labeled with biotin in a Cre-dependent manner. To understand the molecular impact of RTT-associated mutations on neuronal cell type-specific gene expression in vivo , they also developed knock-in mice bearing one of two frequent RTT missense mutations with different clinical severities, T158M and R106W. When combined with Fluorescence-Activated Cell Sorting (FACS), this strategy allows for the isolation of neuronal nuclei from targeted cell types. By examining MeCP2-mediated gene expression changes in different types of neurons, they identified underlying transcriptional features that are cell type specific and correlate with the severity of the MeCP2 mutation. They also found that MeCP2-dependent repression of long genes is not observed in nascent RNA transcripts, suggesting the presence of post-transcriptional compensation of RNAs in MeCP2 mutant-expressing cells ( Johnson et al., 2017 ). Due to the fact that hundreds of genes are subtly altered in MeCP2 mutants, it has been difficult to identify uncontroversial MeCP2 targets and to fully make sense of the large variability of differentially expressed genes. Nevertheless, the MeCP2-biotin tag approach circumvents X-linked cellular mosaicism and allows profiling the transcriptome of neighboring wild-type and mutant neurons in females, thereby discerning cell and non-cell autonomous transcriptional effects ( Johnson et al., 2017 ).
While studying knock-in mice carrying RTT-associated common mutations, Zhou and colleagues also found that mutations in the methyl-CpG binding domain (MBD) of MeCP2, such as T158M, T158A and R106W, impair MeCP2 binding to DNA, and concomitantly destabilize MeCP2 protein in an age-dependent manner ( Goffin et al., 2011 ; Lamonica et al., 2017 ; Johnson et al., 2017 ). Interestingly, genetic elevation of MeCP2 T158M expression ameliorates multiple RTT-like features, including motor dysfunction and breathing irregularities, in both male and female mice. These improvements are accompanied by increased binding of MeCP2 T158M to chromatin. Notably, overexpression of MeCP2 T158M in transgenic mice does not lead to the development of RTT-like phenotypes, ruling out the possibility that MeCP2 T158M shows dominant negative effects ( Lamonica et al., 2017 ). Together, these findings demonstrate that reduced levels of MeCP2 T158M at least partially underlie RTT pathology, and provide a proof-of-principle that pharmacologic elevation or stabilization of MeCP2 protein represents a novel approach to treat patients with MBD missense mutations.
Among the multiple known functions of MeCP2, its role in modulating RNA splicing is less well understood. Chang's laboratory at the Waisman IDDRC took several unbiased approaches to investigate how MeCP2 may regulate splicing, what splicing changes are caused by the loss of MeCP2, and what functional consequences are caused by altered splicing. Using ChIP-seq and co-immunoprecipitation followed by mass spectrometry, they discovered that MeCP2 physically interacts with several modulators of RNA splicing, including LEDGF and DHX9. These interactions are disrupted by RTT causing mutations, suggesting that they may play a role in RTT pathogenesis. Consistent with the idea, deep RNA sequencing revealed misregulation of hundreds of splicing events in the cortex of Mecp2 knockout (KO) mice. To reveal the functional consequence of altered RNA splicing due to the loss of MeCP2, they then focused on the regulation of the splicing of the flip/flop exon (two alternatively spliced exons, termed flop and flip, situated between the L3- and the M4-coding exons, Sommer et al., 1990 ) of Gria2 and other AMPAR genes and found a significant splicing shift in the flip/flop exon toward the flop inclusion, leading to a faster decay in the AMPAR gated current and altered synaptic transmission in cortical neurons in the Mecp2 KO mice. Importantly, they designed an engineered splicing factor that specifically targets the flip/flop exons, and showed that it is sufficient to rescue the defects in flip/flop splicing, AMPAR current and altered synaptic transmission in Mecp2 KO neurons ( Li et al., 2016 ). Interestingly, widespread aberrations in alternative splicing was recently demonstrated in response to neuronal activity, elicited either in vitro by potassium chloride (KCl) or in vivo by kai-nic acid (KA) in the hippocampi of Mecp2 KO mice ( Osenberg et al., 2018 ). These results further advance our understanding of the molecular function of MeCP2 and reveal potential drug targets for future therapies.
Growing evidence indicates that disruption of MeCP2 function negatively impacts early developmental stages including neurogenesis, migration, and patterning ( Feldman et al., 2016 ). In both the embryonic and adult brain, a critical step in neurogenesis is neuronal maturation. Zhao's laboratory at the Waisman IDDRC has discovered that MeCP2 plays critical roles in the maturation step of new neurons during neurogenesis through the regulation of expression of a microRNA, miR-15a ( Gao et al., 2014 ). MeCP2 is known to regulate the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a potent neurotrophic factor for neuronal maturation. Nevertheless, how MeCP2 regulates BDNF expression and how MeCP2 deficiency leads to reduced BDNF expression remain unclear. Overexpression of miR-15a inhibits dendritic morphogenesis in immature neurons. On the other hand, a reduction in miR-15a has the opposite effect. They further showed that miR-15a regulates expression levels of BDNF, and exogenous BDNF could partially rescue the neuronal maturation deficits resulting from miR-15a overexpression. Finally, inhibition of miR-15a could rescue neuronal maturation deficits in MeCP2-deficient adult-born new neurons. These results demonstrate a novel role for miR-15a in neuronal development and provide a missing link in the regulation of BDNF by MeCP2 ( Gao et al., 2014 ).
MeCP2 is a reader and interpreter of DNA methylation across the genome. A better understanding of how extracellular signals access MeCP2 to generate adaptive functional outputs will provide valuable insights into how such a critical epigenetic interface influences normal and abnormal development and function of the mammalian nervous system. Chan's laboratory used the well-established experimental system of adult neurogenesis to investigate the central role of stimulus-induced MeCP2 phosphorylation. They discovered that S421 is phosphorylated in proliferating adult neural progenitor cells (aNPCs) in response to growth factors (i.e. FGF2/EGF) and linked to cell cycle. MeCP2 physically interacts with aurora kinase B (AurkB) directly regulating the cell cycle-linked S421 phosphorylation in aNPCs through the Notch signaling pathway, downstream effector of S421 phosphorylation. These results not only provide the first genetic evidence that the precise control of MeCP2 phosphorylation plays an important role in regulating adult neurogenesis, but also lend mechanistic insights into how MeCP2 phosphorylation may regulate adult neurogenesis. Prior to this study, S421 phosphorylation has been detected exclusively in post-mitotic neurons. By discovering S421 phosphorylation in a dividing cell type and defining its upstream signaling pathway, its direct kinase, and its downstream effector pathway that are completely different from those known in post-mitotic neurons, these results further support the idea that S421 phosphorylation is a general molecular switch accessible to diverse stimuli through different signaling pathways with important functional outcomes in different cell types ( Li et al., 2014 ).
Functions of MeCP2 during early neurogenesis affect neuronal migration and cortical patterning. Data, however, have demonstrated that NPCs derived from Mecp2 KO mice exhibit delayed corticogenesis with respect to migration from the subventricular and ventricular zones into the cortical plate ( Bedogni et al., 2016 ). These findings raise the possibility that these early defects may contribute to the derailing of neuronal circuits during postnatal life.
MeCP2 deficiency causing RTT has a major negative impact on formation and stabilization of synapses and synaptic plasticity ( Johnston et al., 2015 ). Mutant mouse models have been generated with a global deletion of MeCP2 from all neurons and selectively from specific neuronal subtypes and glia or at different stages of development. Deletion or re-expression lines have served as a powerful tool to study the common principles underlying synaptic defects in RTT.
Brain growth slows in the neonatal period due to failure of synapse proliferation, and pathological examination of nasal biopsy samples from girls with RTT compared to controls showed that olfactory receptor neurons failed to form synapses with neurons in the olfactory bulb ( Ronnett et al., 2003 ). Analysis of postmortem human brain from girls with RTT of different ages show increased concentrations of N -methyl- D -aspartate receptors (NMDA) and α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-m ethyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) type glutamate receptors in frontal cortex and caudate-putamen in younger girls with fewer receptors in those older than 8 years of age ( Blue et al., 1999a , b ). A similar age-dependent pattern of increased NMDA and AMPA receptors followed by a decline in number was present in the frontal cortex of Mecp2 deficient mice compared to wild-type controls ( Blue et al., 2011 ).
NMDARs are critical for many forms of learning and memory, in part due to their activity dependence and contribution to synaptic integration and plasticity ( Paoletti et al., 2013 ). The GluN2 subunit composition determines the decay kinetics of the NMDARs, which undergo an experience-dependent switch from GluN2B to GluN2A at cortical synapses during early postnatal development ( Carmignoto and Vicini, 1992 ). The Fagiolini laboratory demonstrated that in the absence of MeCP2 the time course of NMDAR maturation in visual cortex is differentially affected depending on cell type, being slower in pyramidal neurons and faster in PV positive inhibitory cells in complete contrast to WT littermate mice ( Mierau et al., 2016 ). Reducing GluN2A expression in mutant mice prevented the premature NMDAR maturation in PV cells and rescued RTT cortical phenotype. These results suggest that MeCP2 dysfunction alters excitatory transmission in a cell-specific manner.
Glutamate, the major excitatory neurotransmitter in the brain, is elevated in both cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and brain of girls with RTT ( Hamberger et al., 1992 ; Lappalainen and Riikonen, 1996 ; Horska et al., 2009 ) and in Mecp2 KO mice ( Pozo and Goda, 2010 ). Analysis of sleep stages and brain levels of glutamate using continuous monitoring of both EEG and intracerebral glutamate levels using an intra-cerebral electrode in mecp2-deficient mice showed markedly disrupted sleep with long periods of wakefulness compared to controls ( Johnston et al., 2014 ). Brain glutamate normally rises during wakefulness in rodents, and then falls during sleep but in the MeCP2-deficient mice glutamate rose to much higher than normal levels during wakefulness before falling ( Johnston et al., 2014 ). These findings support the hypothesis that Mecp2 deficiency causes a failure of synaptic scaling, a form of homeostatic synaptic plasticity, in the developing brain ( Pozo and Goda, 2010 ). Homeostatic synaptic plasticity is a mechanism that allows neuronal circuits to offset excessive excitation or inhibition. Conditional knockout of Mecp2 in mice has been shown to impair synaptic scaling mediated by changes in levels of GluR2 subunits of the AMPA receptor ( Qui et al., 2012 ). These findings are consistent with the observations that high levels of glutamate co-exist with high levels of glutamate receptors in developing human and mouse brains with a RTT mutation.
A defect in homeostatic plasticity may also be caused by MeCP2 dysfunction in GABAergic neurons ( Chao et al., 2010 ; He et al., 2014 ; Ure et al., 2016 ). As a chromatin-associated protein, MeCP2 affects the expression of a large number of GABAergic related genes ( Chao et al., 2010 ; Durand et al., 2012 ). As such, deletion or re-expression of Mecp2 from GABAergic neurons (using Viaat - Cre ; Dlx5/6 - Cre , PV-Cre or Sst-Cre mouse lines) disrupt or recover cortical function respectively ( Chao et al., 2010 ; Durand et al., 2012 ; Goffin et al., 2014 ; He et al., 2014 ; Ure et al., 2016 ). In Mecp2 KO mice, calcium binding protein parvalbumin (PV) is significantly upregulated across multiple cortical areas, such as V1, A1, S1 and M1 ( Durand et al., 2012 ; Mierau et al., 2016 ; Krishnan et al., 2015 ; Patrizi et al., 2019 , Morello et al., 2018 ). This is accompanied by premature switch in NMDA receptor composition ( Mierau et al., 2016 ) and excessive excitatory inputs converging onto PV-expressing interneurons ( Morello et al., 2018 ; Sigal et al 2019 ). Hyper-complex PV-positive large basket cells are also hyper-connected onto the soma of pyramidal neurons ( Durand et al., 2012 ; Mierau et al., 2016 ; Patrizi et al., 2019 ). An increase in the density of calretinin (CR)- and PV-positive cells across S1, M1 and V1 cortex has also been reported by one study ( Tomassy et al., 2014 ). Together these contribute to decreasing output firing of pyramidal neurons across cortical regions very early on in the progression of the disorder as measured both in vitro and in vivo electrophysiological and anatomical analysis. As regression is completed, there is a significant downregulation of GAD65 and GAD67 GABA synthesized enzymes as well as CR and somatostatin (SST) markers, suggesting a possible homeostatic attempt to dampening the strength of GABAergic circuits in Mecp2 KO mice ( Chao et al., 2010 ; Durand et al., 2012 ; Krishnan et al., 2015 ; 2017 ; Patrizi et al., 2019 ). It is interesting to note that loss of MeCP2 function in excitatory neurons expressing vesicular glutamate2 transporter (Vglut2), causes some features (e.g. anxiety, tremors) not seen in mice lacking the protein in inhibitory neurons, whereas there were some overlapping phenotypes ( Meng et al., 2016 ). Neuron-specific rescue experiments revealed the surprising finding that rescue in Vglut2-expressing cells corrected the phenotypes in female mice, whereas a rescue in Viaat-expressing cells was most robust in male mice. These data highlight the network differences in male (null) versus female (mosaic) mice, and underscore the importance of studying female mice to find ways to modulate the course of RTT ( Ure et al., 2016 ; Meng et al., 2016 ).
Over the past few years, non-neuronal cells such as glia have also been shown to play important roles in the pathology of RTT.
As astrocytes are multi-functional regulators of brain metabolism, and directly supply neurons with substrates for oxidative phosphorylation (Stobard and Anderson, 2013), their dysfunction may cause aberrant metabolic support to the brain. Alterations of mitochondria redox status and increased oxidative stress has been reported both in patients and animal models of RTT ( Kriaucionis et al., 2006 ; De Felice et al., 2012 ; Grosser et al., 2012 ; Shulyakova et al., 2017 ; Muller 2019 ; Neul et al., 2020 ). It spans from increased mitochondrial activity and oxygen consumption, over exaggerated mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) release and cytosolic/mitochondrial redox imbalance to disturbed neuronal network function and a facilitation of disease progression ( De Filippis et al., 2015 ; Valenti et al., 2017 ). Yet, the link between MECP2 mutations and the redox imbalance found in RTT is not completely clear. Interestingly, cultured astrocytes from Mecp2 KO mice exhibit higher number of mitochondria and oxidative stress than wild-type astrocytes ( Bebensee et al., 2017 ), while Mecp2 knock-down astrocytes exhibit elevated expression of mitochondrial respiration chain proteins and a lower activity of complexes I and II ( Dave et al., 2019 ). The use of RhoGTPases activators such as cytotoxic necrotizing factor 1 (CNTF1) is sufficient to reduce atrophy of astrocytes, improve brain metabolism and brain bioenergetic markers, and ameliorate significantly the overall neurobehavioral phenotype in mouse models of RTT ( De Filippis et al., 2012 , 2015 ). The systemic redox imbalance and oxidative stress are not limited to RTT but have been reported also in blood samples of MECP2-duplication syndrome ( Signorini et al., 2016 ) or CDKL5 deficiency disorder ( Leoncini et al., 2015 ). Hence, targeting cellular redox balance might represent a potential therapeutic approach to improve neuronal network function.
Interestingly, it was demonstrated that selective re-expression of Mecp2 in astrocytes is sufficient to rescue breathing phenotypes in mouse models ( Lioy et al., 2011 ) but the role of astrocytes in RTT has not yet been validated in human cells. Chang's laboratory at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, IDDRC differentiated human RTT induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) into astrocytes ( Williams et al., 2014 ). They demonstrated that wild-type human astrocytes express detectable levels of MECP2, and that mutant human astrocytes carrying 3 different RTT mutations have an adverse influence on the morphology and function of wild-type neurons. The hallmark pathologies observed in RTT human autopsy samples and in RTT mouse models of small neurons, shorter total neurite length, and fewer terminal ends were also observed in this study. Moreover, they developed a neuron/astrocyte co-culture system that validated previous findings from RTT mouse models and it revealed that both cell types contribute independently and additively to the same morphological deficit in neurons. Finally, the study tested the efficacy of two candidate drugs (full length IGF-1 and the GPE tripeptide) that are currently in clinical trials in RTT patients at the cellular level in the neuron/astrocyte co-culture. Surprisingly, the effect of these drugs on neuronal morphology was dependent on the genotype of the astrocytes in these co-cultures. These results suggest that disease-specific iPSCs and their derivatives are useful in vitro platforms for studying disease mechanisms and testing candidate drugs.
To identify novel cell autonomous phenotypes in RTT astrocytes, the Chang laboratory used astrocytes differentiated from congenic pairs of human RTT patient specific iPSCs to demonstrate that both the spontaneous and the pharmacologically evoked cytosolic calcium activities are abnormal in mutant RTT astrocytes. A similar phenotype was also identified in astrocytes derived by Mecp2 KO mice. Interestingly, they demonstrated that the abnormal calcium activities in astrocytes lead to excessive activation of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors (eNMDARs) on neighboring neurons and increased network excitability as a direct consequence of the loss of Mecp2 ( Dong et al., 2018 ). In the same year, Mandel's group show that Mecp2 -negative astrocytes derived either from Mecp2 KO mice or Mecp2 Het mice fail to increase synaptic modulation as in WT mice and that the calcium signals in astrocytes are severely weakened ( Rakela et al., 2018 ).
MeCP2 is expressed in microglia and related mononuclear phagocytes and regulates their functions, but the pathological role of microglia in RTT remains controversial ( Maezawa and Jin, 2010 ; Derecki et al., 2012 ; Wang et al., 2015 ; Horiuchi et al., 2017 ; Schafer et al., 2016 ; Jin et al., 2015 ; Cronk et al., 2015 ). Derecki et al. (2012) and Cronk et al. (2015) provided in vivo data supporting that microglial abnormalities drive RTT progression. They showed that Mecp2 -KO mice, which usually die at 8-10 weeks, became almost normal and lived to nearly one year after their brains were populated with wild-type myeloid cells/microglia by a bone-marrow transplant approach. However, some key results were not reproduced in a recent study ( Wang et al., 2015 ), making the role of microglia unsettled. On the other hand, a recent gene array study in microglia derived from heterozygous (Het) female mice, carrying one Mecp2 -null allele, shows that genes involved in innate immunity and macrophage activation are differentially expressed both at pre-phenotypic (5 weeks) to phenotypic phases (24 weeks), suggesting the dysfunction of MeCP2 can lead to dysregulation of inflammatory responses contributing to some aspects of the progression of disease pathogenesis ( Zhao et al., 2017 ).
IDDRC investigators at two sites, Boston Children's Hospital and University of California Davis, have made significant progress in clarifying the role of microglia in RTT. Schafer et al. (2016) examined the retinogeniculate system in Mecp2 null mice throughout disease progression. They found that microglia excessively engulfed and removed presynaptic inputs during the last stage of the disorder. Surprisingly, the selective manipulation of Mecp2 expression in microglia did not impact this synaptic pruning phenotype or any other manifestation of the disease in the mice. Combining these results with the previous finding that lack of Mecp2 weakens single fiber synapse strength ( Noutel et al., 2011 ), microglia appear to target circuits made vulnerable during the early stages of the disorder and dismantle them in the final stages. Importantly, microglia do this independent of their own expression of Mecp2 .
Horiuchi et al. (2017) from the University of California Davis conducted a study demonstrating a critical role for microglia in RTT. They found that ablation of CX 3 CR1, a key microglial receptor mediating neuron-microglia interaction, substantially improved respiratory and motor functions and prolonged the lifespan of Mecp2 -KO mice. Interestingly, CX 3 CR1 ablation also restored the microglial morphology and quantity to wild-type levels in multiple brain regions. It remains to be determined if CX 3 CR1 ablation improves microglial function and morphology via a cell-autonomous mechanism or by blocking the detrimental non-cell autonomous influences from abnormal MeCP2-deficient neurons. The other interesting and somewhat surprising finding was that complete (Cx 3 -cr −/− ) and partial (Cx 3 cr1 −/+ ) ablation of CX 3 CR1 nearly equally attenuated disease severity. The Cx3cr1-EGFP targeted mutation line, which is equivalent to Cx 3 cr1 −/+ used in this study, has been frequently used for studying microglial function in vivo because microglia are labeled with EGFP. This result should raise awareness that Cx3cr1-EGFP microglia may behave differently from and by no means represent wild-type microglia.
The epigenomic-bioenergetic hypothesis, proposed by Wallace and Fan (2010) , states that perturbation of the epigenome causes various pathologies via disrupting the coordinated expression of bioenergetic genes to reduce mitochondrial function. Consistent with this hypothesis, another study from University of California Davis IDDRC investigators found that MeCP2 deficiency impairs microglial mitochondrial function, and causes over-production of mitochondrial reactive oxygen species ( Jin et al., 2015 ). Interestingly, severe mitochondrial structural damage was only found in microglia and not in astrocytes or neurons in Mecp2 -KO mice. While mitochondrial abnormalities may be global as a consequence of MeCP2 deficiency, the observation that mitochondrial structural damage is only seen in microglia suggests highlighted vulnerability of microglia to prolonged or high oxidative stress leading to structural changes in proteins, lipids, and DNA ( Dai et al., 2014 ).
This selective susceptibility perhaps is not surprising considering that microglia are at the forefront of coping with the brain microenvironment ( Hammond et al., 2018 ) and should be strongly dependent on epigenetic regulation ( Cheray and Joseph, 2018 ). Moreover, microglia are constantly motile and robustly reactive ( Nimmerjahn et al., 2005 ; Davalos et al., 2005 ), for which efficient bioenergetic regulation is of utmost importance. Failure of the MeCP2-directed epigenetic-bioenergetic pathways would be devastating to microglial function and survival, a fundamental mechanism that may underlie microglial abnormalities and premature death in RTT models ( Maezawa and Jin, 2010 ; Horiuchi et al., 2017 ; Jin et al., 2015 ; Cronk et al., 2015 ; Derecki et al., 2012 ).
Neurons communicate and get organized into circuits through such synapses, thereby gaining the capability to process information from the outside world. Abnormalities in synaptic excitation (E), inhibition (I), and excitation/inhibition ratio (E/I) in cortical circuits greatly affect both dynamics and information processing of neuronal circuits, and are widely considered to be the root cause of the plethora of symptoms characterizing RTT during development and adulthood.
Anatomical and functional abnormalities have been well described in multiple neuronal circuits in both cortical and subcortical brain regions and have highlighted a distinct phenotype based on the area analyzed: excitatory hypoconnectivity in forebrain regions and hyperconnectivity in brainstem compartments ( Kron et al., 2012 ). A shift in excitatory-inhibitory balance in favor of inhibition has been extensively reported in somatosensory, visual, auditory, motor, insular and prefrontal cortex by in vitro and in vivo analysis ( Dani et al., 2005 ; Durand et al., 2012 ; Krishnan et al., 2017 ; Wood and Shepherd, 2010 ; Gogolla et al., 2014 ; Sceniak et al., 2016 ). It has been suggested that this early shift is driven by an early structural and functional hyper-maturation of fast-spiking parvalbumin-positive cells (PV) inhibitory interneurons and perineuronal nets enwrapping them ( Durand et al., 2012 ; Krishnan et al., 2015 ; Patrizi et al., 2019 ; Sigal et al., 2019 ) and a concurrent immaturity of excitatory synapses ( Mierau et al., 2016 ). Using super resolution fluorescence imaging, Sigal et al (2019) also recently showed that in Mecp2 KO mice, PV cells receive weaker recurrent inhibitory inputs and stronger thalamocortical excitatory inputs in the primary visual cortex. Overall, there is growing evidence that PV circuits are functionally and structurally upregulated throughout the progression of the disorder. Future work should be devoted to a comprehensive functional characterization of other inhibitory cell types (CR, SST, VIP) across selective cortical areas in relation to the progression of the disorder.
On the other hand, brainstem regions display synaptic hyperexcitability and increased expression of immediately early gene c-Fos ( Kron et al., 2012 ). The hippocampal circuits set themselves apart by exhibiting hyperexcitability due to a loss of excitatory drive onto inhibitory circuits ( Calfa et al., 2015 ). Some of these changes are present very early on in the postnatal development and precede the full onset of RTT phenotype and behavioral regression.
How the imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory transmission in multiple brain circuits drives the onset of epileptic seizures is still puzzling. The late onset of epilepsy likely reflects the miswiring and rewiring of neuronal circuits and the failure of homeostatic synaptic plasticity mechanisms that accompany the progression of the disorder. Rather than acting like a simple break preventing over-excitation of neuronal circuits, GABAergic transmission function critically determines the fine-tuning of a cortical network and its information flow across cortex by enhancing or suppressing dynamically along feed-forward and lateral connections, depending on the stimulus processing demand and the spatial and temporal constraints ( Womelsdorf et al, 2007 ). A study by Lu and colleagues from the BCM-IDDRC revealed that both null males and heterozygous (Het) female RTT mice have abnormally elevated synchrony in the firing activity of hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons, an impaired homeostatic response to perturbations of excitatory-inhibitory balance, and decreased excitatory synaptic response in inhibitory neurons ( Lu et al., 2016 ).
Many of these studies have been conducted in Mecp2 KO mice rather than in Mecp2 Het female mice, a mosaicism model for MeCP2 as found in RTT patients. As MeCP2 is differentially regulated during development in males and females ( Kurian et al., 2007 ), and DNA methylation states are sex-specific ( Lister et al., 2013 ; Keown et al., 2017 ), circuits maturation and refinement may also be differentially regulated in Mecp2 Het females in comparison with null males. Indeed, the rescue in either inhibitory or excitatory neurons gives different results in null males versus the mosaic females underlying the complexity of excitatory/inhibitory balance dysfunction and the network differences in RTT model (females) versus Mecp2 null mice ( Ure et al., 2016 ; Meng et al., 2016 ). Despite the onset of neurological symptoms in Mecp2 Het females in young adulthood (8-12 weeks) and therefore much later compared to patients (first 6-18 months), their behaviors clearly show multiple and robust RTT phenotypes stable across backgrounds such as anxiety-like behavior, fear memory, breathing abnormalities with some phenotypes specific to one of the backgrounds such as acoustic startle and prepulse inhibition, and weight gain ( Samaco et al., 2013 ). In an ethologically relevant behavior, Shea and colleagues have recently demonstrated that Mecp2 Het females fail to learn a simple maternal care behavior performed in response to their pups' distress cries and this impairment appeared to critically involve PV inhibitory neurons in the auditory cortex. Similar to what has been found in null mice in other cortical regions, PV networks and relative perineuronal nets (PNN) undergo precocious and over maturation. While both excitatory and inhibitory PV cells adapt their response to pup calls during maternal learning through disinhibition in WT females, mutants lack such maternal experience-dependent plasticity specifically to vocal signals from pups. In Mecp2 Het, PV spiking activity fails to decrease, preventing the increase of excitatory drive (Krishan et al., 2017; Lau et al., 2020 ). Similarly, accelerating rotarod task for 2 consecutive days in Mecp2 tm1.1Jae mouse line, was accompanied by a shift of PV expression to a higher state in M1 ( Morello et al., 2018 ). Together these studies confirm significant cortical defects of experience-dependent plasticity in mice models of RTT that persist past early development and affect adult behavior.
As the previous section detailed, excitatory/inhibitory balance is disrupted in RTT animal models, across all cortical areas tested so far ( Katz et al., 2016 ). Alterations of synaptic physiology ultimately lead to miswiring of circuits and drive abnormal sensory, motor, and cognitive function. In the past few years, increasing attention has been given to the evaluation of sensory processing in visual and auditory cortices in RTT patients as a non-invasive and quantitative probing of cortical function. Sensory evoked potentials can be elicited using passive presentation of a sensory (auditory, visual, or somatosensory) stimulus, without requiring any sedation, overt effort or a behavioral response on part of the subject, making them suitable for severely impaired populations, such as RTT patients.
Researchers at Boston Children's Hospital IDDRC have found analogous deficits in visual processing in mouse models and humans. In 2012, Durand et al. reported a regression in visual acuity in Mecp2 KO mice, measured both behaviorally and electrophysiologically, coupled with decreased spontaneous and evoked single unit activity in the visual cortex. Following up on this result, LeBlanc et al. (2015) found that Mecp2 heterozygous female mice also exhibited reduced visual acuity and altered shape of the visual evoked potential (VEP) waveform. Strikingly, VEPs measured in girls with RTT displayed the same morphological changes, diminished and protracted waveform, and these aspects were impacted by disease stage and mutation type. Analysis of VEPs in response to a range of spatial frequencies revealed that the RTT group also exhibited reduced spatial acuity. These results paralleled the previous findings of Saunders and colleagues (1995) showing reduced amplitude of VEP in response to low spatial frequencies in a small group of RTT subjects.
Visual circuit abnormalities in RTT have also been revealed by another independent study investigating how the absence of Mecp2 in mice impacts experience-dependent plasticity in the visual cortex ( Krishnan et al., 2015 ). The critical period for ocular dominance plasticity was moved forward in Mecp2 null mice, opening and closing precociously, as measured using optical imaging in the visual cortex following monocular deprivation. This critical period is a time during which experience helps shape circuits in the visual cortex, enabling the matching of orientation tuning between the two eyes. In Mecp2 null mice, binocular matching of orientation preference was disrupted, providing an example of how the altered critical period may impact vision in RTT. Interestingly, these changes in visual plasticity and function were accompanied by an acceleration of parvalbumin interneuron maturation, fitting with other reports ( Durand et al., 2012 , Patrizi et al., 2019 ; Lau et al., 2020 ).
Auditory processing is another sensory domain being actively investigated in RTT. Language and communication are severely impaired in RTT, but it is unclear if basic auditory processing is compromised as well. Auditory Event Related Potentials (ERP) have been measured in mouse models of RTT with the aim of assaying cortical function and determining the cellular basis for deficits. Mice carrying the T158A mutation were found to display delayed and diminished ERPs in response to white noise stimulation, but only while symptomatic (after P30) ( Goffin et al., 2011 ). A study by the same group removed and re-expressed Mecp2 specifically from different cell types in order to determine the cellular origins of these ERP deficits ( Goffin et al., 2014 ). They found that loss of Mecp2 from forebrain GABAergic neurons was sufficient to produce the ERP deficits and restoration of Mecp2 expression to either PV or SST-expression interneurons was able to partially rescue these deficits ( Goffin et al., 2014 ). Notably, the same research group used a transgenic approach to increase MeCP2 T158M expression and found that elevation of MeCP2 T158M protein level significantly ameliorates numerous RTT-related phenotypes, including the restoration of auditory ERP response, highlighting the feasibility and validity if using auditory ERP as a biomarker for RTT ( Lamonica et al., 2017 ).
Researchers at the Einstein College of Medicine IDDRC, Children's Hospital at Montefiore, and the University of Rochester are using ERPs to assess auditory function in females with RTT, using simple tones that are the building blocks of speech perception to semantic processing. Foxe and colleagues ( Foxe et al., 2016 ) report findings on auditory function in 14 girls with genetically confirmed RTT and 22 age-matched neurotypical controls (ages: 3.9-21.1 years). Here they tested the ability to distinguish the frequency of two tones by presenting a stream of standard 503 Hz tones occasionally interspersed with a higher-pitched deviant tone of 996 Hz, and measuring the mismatch negativity response (the MMN, derived by subtracting the auditory evoked brain response (AEP) to the deviants from the AEP to the standards). The MMN indexes the brains ability to discriminate between sounds and, despite being recorded in passive listening conditions, is highly associated with behavioral discrimination.
The data revealed a clear MMN response in the Rett group, although this was both delayed and protracted in duration compared to an age matched control group. Furthermore, the base AEP was highly anomalous in the Rett girls in both this and a subsequent study ( Brina et al., 2019 ), and further pointed to slowing of auditory responsiveness in this group. These data suggest preserved but atypical ability to process pitch changes in RTT. A similar approach was used to test the cortical representation of auditory stimulus duration for fast versus slow presentation rates (ranging from ~2 stimuli per second to õne stimulus every two seconds) (Brima et al., 2019). Small differences in stimulus duration (of 80 ms) evoked MMN responses in the RTT group at the fastest presentation rate. However, when stimuli were presented at slightly slower rates, this response appeared largely abolished in the RTT group. So, while RTT patients can decode deviations in auditory duration, the span of auditory sensory memory is severely curtailed, with likely implications for the processing of speech and language. These findings are similar to what was found in the visual system, where clear VEP responses were present and modulated by spatial frequency in individuals with RTT, but waveform amplitude was diminished and protracted and the threshold of visual acuity was decreased ( LeBlanc et al., 2015 ). What is more, auditory atypicalities of delayed and reduced sensory evoked responses have been observed in rodent models of Rett ( Schoups et al., 2001 ; Liao et al., 2012 ).
AEPs also allow the probing of impairments in speech perception. Peters et al. (2015 , 2017 ) were the first to quantify changes in gamma band power in response to familiar and novel voices or own names versus other names in a small cohort of children with Rett and MDS. Although AEPs from all patients clearly indicate the ability to discriminate between the two stimuli, yet the relative changes in gamma power are in opposite directions, suggesting that under- versus over-expression of the MECP2 protein has a differential impact on cortical processes. Interestingly, the bigger amplitude of the AEPs found in MDS patients was associated with higher social functioning. Recently, Key and colleagues (2019) reported that girls with RTT use not-canonical circuits (right vs left parietal hemisphere) to distinguish familiar versus not familiar words.
It is noteworthy that event related evoked potentials are also abnormal in CDKL5 and FOXG1 deficient mouse and patients ( Wang et al., 2012a , b ; Boggio et al 2016 ; Mazziotti et al., 2017; Demarest et al 2019 ) further supporting the use of evoked potentials as quantitative and not invasive probing tools for better understanding the pathophysiology of RTT, MECP2 duplication and related disorders. However, a consortium approach, in which systematic longitudinal studies of significantly larger samples could be coordinated, would significantly improve the ability to capture the progression of the disorders in such heterogeneous patient populations, and link neural function with clinical phenotype, disease stage, and so forth to progress the possibility of ERP/EEG data serving as critical biomarkers of disease state and treatment efficacy, an idea that is addressed in more detail below.
There is an urgent need for objective, quantitative, non-invasive and translational biomarkers for early diagnosis of disorder status, its progression over time and potential response to therapeutic interventions. Ideally, each domain impacted by the disorder should be identified by one or more selective biomarkers for cross-reference, accuracy and evaluation of possible interaction across domains. In addition to ERPs described above, recently Fagiolini's lab and colleagues have shown that pupillometry and heart rate variation (HRV), two proxies of spontaneous arousal fluctuations, combined with deep machine learning, allow early and highly accurate diagnosis of RTT across species ( Artoni et al., 2019 ). RTT is characterized by deficits in cholinergic neuromodulation, attention and altered regulation of autonomic arousal from very early on during the disorder. By taking advantage of deep machine learning, they trained neural networks to recognize patterns of spontaneous arousal fluctuations typical from mice with heightened cholinergic sensitivity (ConvNetACh) and used them to then successfully detect impaired fluctuations in both Mecp2 KO and Mecp2 Het mice, even before mice became symptomatic. Similar defects were also detected in CDKL5 KO adult mice ( Artoni et al., 2019 ). More importantly, by retraining only the last layers of ConvNetACh with arousal data directly from RTT patients, they generated a neural network (ConvNetPatients) capable of predicting RTT ( Artoni et al., 2019 ). The cross-species reproducibility of this approach, the non-invasive nature of arousal proxies, such as pupillometry and HRV, and the intrinsic flexibility of deep neural networks can allow trained networks to be adapted to rare patient data, significantly increasing the translational value to these rapidly collected biomarkers of arousal.
Existing knowledge of the molecular, cellular and circuit mechanisms underlying postnatal development, plasticity and mature function of auditory and visual sensory areas and the preservation across species of the fundamental processes represent a powerful tool in the quest of dissecting the role of MeCP2 in RTT and the identification of possible intervention strategies. Progress in understanding the neurobiological basis of RTT has led to the development of numerous promising therapeutic strategies. Therapies can generally be categorized as either (1) targeting the downstream cellular pathways and circuits disrupted by MeCP2 deficiency or (2) gene therapy approaches that target the MECP2 gene directly itself. The robust efficacy of several of such interventions at the preclinical level has created great hope in the Rett community for treatments for the condition ( Clarke and Addala Sheikh, 2018 ; van Karnebeek et al., 2016 ).
Here we will discuss several treatments relating to the first (deep brain stimulation, low dose ketamine, and valproic acid) and second (gene therapy and X chromosome reactivation) categories.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is a therapy that involves implanting electrodes in the brain that emits electrical stimulation to reset abnormal signaling; much like a pacemaker acts to normalize a disrupted heartbeat. DBS can alleviate motor dysfunction in disorders like Parkinson's disease ( Huang et al., 2018 ) and dystonia ( Hu and Stead, 2014 ) and may improve cognition too, as in the case of Alzheimer's disease ( Aldehri et al., 2018 ). DBS is appealing because it can be directed to different brain targets depending on the symptoms and it is relatively safe and reversible.
Individuals with RTT suffer from motor and cognitive dysfunction, making DBS a therapy worth pursuing. Studies by BCM-IDDRC investigators using DBS in mouse models of RTT show promise. Forniceal DBS rescued contextual fear memory and spatial learning and memory in adult Mecp2 heterozygous female mice ( Hao et al., 2015 ). DBS also rescued in vivo hippocampal long-term potentiation and neurogenesis, providing a putative mechanism for the behavioral benefits. A follow-up study explored the effect of forniceal DBS on hippocampal circuits in the RTT mouse model and found a positive effect on CA1 pyramidal synchrony, homeostatic plasticity, and excitatory synaptic responses in inhibitory neurons ( Lu et al., 2016 ).
A study by Pohodich and colleagues from BCM-IDDRC shed some light into the mechanisms behind the well-established DBS benefits. In particular, they assessed gene expression and proteome changes following forniceal DBS in wild-type mice, Mecp2 KO and Mecp2 Het Mice showing that DBS upregulates genes involved in synaptic function, cell survival, and neurogenesis and normalized expression of ~25% of the genes altered in Mecp2 KO mice. The restored genes in Mecp2 KO mice were mainly enriched in neural functions, including components of synapses such as Gad2 (Glutamate Decarboxylase 2) and Grin2d (Glutamate Ionotropic Receptor NMDA Type Subunit 2D). Variation of GABA synthesis and NMDA receptor signaling have been implicated in the circuit dysfunction observed in these mice ( Chao et al., 2010 , Durand et al., 2012 , Ure et al., 2016 ), suggesting that DBS acts through physiological pathways improving plasticity ( Pohodich et al., (2018) .
These findings support the argument that RTT is a neural circuit disorder and show that DBS could represent a strategy to renormalize the activity of circuits and improve cognition. Much work still remains, including determining the ideal frequency and duration of treatment and confirming long-term safety in a pediatric population.
Substantial evidence demonstrates that NMDARs are abnormal in RTT, in both human tissue ( Blue et al., 1999a , b ) and mice ( Asaka et al., 2006 ; Blue et al., 2011 ; Durand et al., 2012 ; Mierau et al., 2016 ). In an attempt to normalize glutamatergic signaling, the NMDAR antagonist ketamine is being explored as a potential treatment for RTT. In 2012, Kron et al. rescued hypoexcitability of the forebrain and sensorimotor gating deficits in heterozygous Mecp2 female mice with a single treatment of low-dose ketamine. This subanesthetic dose has been shown to specifically reduce NMDAR activity onto parvalbumin fast-spiking inhibitory neurons ( Kinney et al., 2006 ; Behrens et al., 2007 ; Picard et al., 2019 ), a cell population whose maturation is accelerated in the absence of Mecp2 in mice, leading to increased innervation of pyramidal cells and an overall silencing of the visual cortex ( Durand et al., 2012 ; Mierau et al., 2016 ; Patrizi et al, 2019 ).
Based on this evidence, Patrizi et al. from the IDDRC at Boston Children's Hospital set out to perform a preclinical trial for chronic ketamine treatment in Mecp2 KO mice, testing the ability to prevent the onset of symptoms by early administration (from P15 on) and the ability to rescue symptoms with later administration (from P30 on) ( Patrizi et al., 2016 ). Both treatment paradigms were well-tolerated and caused no adverse side effects. Lifespan was extended and many RTT-related symptoms were improved, including hindlimb clasping, motor coordination, and breathing. Visual regression was slowed and visual cortical activity and connectivity were normalized. These effects of ketamine are likely a result of preferential binding to highly active NMDARs on parvalbumin interneurons, dampening their inhibitory effect on pyramidal cells and restoring normal levels of excitation in the cortex.
The next step for mouse preclinical work is to test in heterozygous female mice, the closer model for human RTT. As Picard et al have shown, attention should be paid when administering low dosage ketamine to females as the response may be affected by estrous cycle ( Picard et al., 2019 ). Short treatment of low-dose ketamine is currently being scheduled in patients in an ongoing Phase 2 clinical trial at the Cleveland Clinic and Case Western Reserve University ( www.clinicaltrials.gov , {"type":"clinical-trial","attrs":{"text":"NCT02562820","term_id":"NCT02562820"}} NCT02562820 ). The results of this trial combined with the preclinical work in mice will soon yield a definitive answer of whether low-dose ketamine is an effective treatment for RTT syndrome and will help to further elucidate the neurobiological mechanisms behind its actions.
VPA, also call ed valproate, is a drug commonly used to treat bipolar disorder, epilepsy, and to prevent migraines ( Chiu et al., 2013 ). While its mechanism of action is not completely understood, it is known to be a histone deacetylase inhibitor, reactivates transcription of a wide range of genes and it has been implicated in reopening synaptic plasticity in adult visual cortex ( Göttlicher, 2004 ; Lennartsoon et al., 2015 ).
IDDRC investigators at the University of Wisconsin, Madison and Kyushu University in Fukuoka, Japan tested whether VPA could positively impact the condition of symptomatic Mecp2 KO mice ( Guo et al., 2014 ). When six-week-old Mecp2 KO mice were injected daily with VPA for 2 weeks, the mice exhibited improvement in some RTT-related symptoms and a subset of downregulated genes were restored to near-normal levels. On the other hand, VPA has been used to treat RTT patients in limited clinical studies, mainly in order to manage seizures, and the results are mixed ( Faulkner and Singh, 2013 ). One study reported no improvements from VPA ( Huppke et al., 2007 ) while another found that seizures were significantly reduced ( Krajnc et al., 2011 ). Another reported an increased risk of bone fracture after VPA treatment ( Leonard et al., 2010 ). Thus it is still unclear whether VPA positively impacts RTT-related neurological symptoms and more work may be needed.
Gene therapy or introduction of a healthy copy of MECP2 into the brain, represents a potential one-time treatment that could address the root causes of RTT. Viral vector-mediated MECP2 gene transfer has been used in recent years for basic science research as well as proof-of-concept studies for the therapeutic reversal of RTT in mice. However, conceptually, MECP2 gene therapy is challenging for two primary reasons: (1) To create a broadly efficacious, safe gene therapy approach, researchers must create vectors that restore MeCP2 activity in unhealthy cells while avoiding a MeCP2 duplication-like phenotype ( Lombardi et al., 2015 ); (2) Depending on the treatment age and injection route (in mice), researchers may have difficulty achieving moderate or high levels of transduction efficiency with widespread delivery throughout the brain ( Lombardi et al., 2015 ; Gadalla et al., 2013 ).
Despite these conceptual challenges, three labs have independently shown that adeno-associated viral (AAV) vector-mediated MECP2 gene transfer can extend lifespan and reverse or delay behavioral abnormalities in mouse models of RTT ( Gadalla et al., 2013 ; Garg et al., 2013 ; Matagne et al., 2017 ). In short, Gadalla et al. demonstrated that intracerebral administration of single-stranded (ss) AAV9/CBA- MECP2 in Mecp2 -null neonates can extend lifespan while improving multiple phenotypic readouts, including rearing frequency, poor treadmill performance, and poor locomotor scores during open field tests ( Gadalla et al., 2013 ). Intravenous (IV) administration of self-complementary (sc) AAV9/MeP229- MECP2 also extended lifespan in juvenile Mecp2 KO mice but induced acute liver toxicity in WT mice ( Gadalla et al., 2013 ). More recently, Matagne et al. published experiments showing that codon-optimized MECP2 gene transfer (also under a truncated MECP2 promoter) extends survival of Mecp2 -null mice and delays the onset of behavioral deficits in rotarod and open field tests ( Matagne et al., 2017 ). Concurrently with Gadalla et al., Garg and colleagues showed that scAAV9-MeP730- MECP2 extended the median survival of Mecp2-null mice and improved scores for nest building, rotarod, and inverted grid tests for female RTT mice ( Garg et al., 2013 ).
Yet another independently developed viral vector has provided further evidence that MECP2 gene transfer can be therapeutic in vivo ( Tai et al., 2016 ). This lentiviral vector was developed as a tool to help understand the role of post-translational sumoylation of MeCP2 (addition of small ubiquitin-like modifier proteins called SUMOs). Although the authors' gene transfer studies were part of a larger goal to elucidate a specific MeCP2-dependent signaling pathway, the in vivo experiments in Mecp2 conditional (inducible and brain region-specific) knockout mice provided an opportunity to observe downstream behavioral responses. More specifically, gene transfer of SUMO-modified MeCP2 (but not a sumoylation-resistant MeCP2 variant) improved long-term potentiation (LTP), social interaction, and memory retention relative to those of negative controls ( Tai et al., 2016 ).
A legitimate concern of MECP2 gene transfer is that it will induce neurological abnormalities in animals expressing supraphysiological levels of MeCP2 in transduced cells ( Lombardi et al., 2015 ; Gadalla et al., 2013 ). Indeed, AAV9/MeP229- MECP2 has recently been shown to increase severity scores for limb clasping and abnormal gait in treated WT and Mecp2 KO mice after intraCSF administration, while an AAV9/MeP229-GFP vector at the same dose and route was well-tolerated ( Sinnett et al., 2017 ). Importantly, a recently developed second-generation vector (AAV9/MeP426- MECP2 ) provides tighter control of transgene expression and - at low intraCSF doses - can extend Mecp2-null survival without inducing the above-mentioned behavioral abnormalities ( Sinnett et al., 2017 ; Gadalla et al., 2017 ). Ongoing vector design efforts will seek to further improve the therapeutic index of MECP2 gene transfer ( Sinnett et al., 2017 ). Together these studies have catapulted gene therapy for RTT to the forefront of interventions. Under the sponsorship of rettSyndromeResearchTrust and AveXis, a clinical trial testing AVXS-201 is under preparation pending the approval of the U.S. Food and Drug administration.
Another approach for treating RTT at the root of its cause is to reactivate the normal copy of MECP2 that resides on the inactive X (Xi) chromosome. While this method avoids the risk of MECP2 overexpression, there is the possibility of complications due to activating many other genes on the Xi chromosome. The ideal method would be to selectively awaken the silent copy of MECP2 rather than the entire X chromosome. Although it's still early, ongoing research is making progress in identifying pharmacological targets for reactivation. New female mouse model with a mutation in the regulator of X chromosome inactivation (Tsix) has been recently generated allowing to skew the MeCP2 levels in the brain and bringing a useful tool to do dose-response types of analysis with candidate compounds ( Carrette et al., 2018 ).
Many laboratories are actively screening to identify new and selective molecules to induce Xi chromosome reactivation ( Lessing et al., 2016 ; Sripathy et al., 2017 ). A screen in mouse fibroblasts looked for small molecules that reactivate the entire Xi chromosome ( Lessing et al., 2016 ). They found that drugs targeting the Aurora kinase and DNA methylation pathways work in synergy to reactivate genes on the X chromosome, including Mecp2 . Another recent shRNA screen in mouse fibroblasts identified 30 genes that normally repress the other copy of Mecp2 ( Sripathy et al., 2017 ). These genes clustered into 7 functional groups and 6 were members of the BMP/TGF-B pathway. Later, the same team showed that small molecule inhibitors acting against previous identified targets, can reactivate Xi-linked Mecp2 in non-dividing cultured RTT neurons and in cerebral cortical neurons of adult mice, demonstrating that reactivation of Xi-linked Mecp2 can occur in post-mitotic brain neurons ( Przanowski et al., 2018 ). As far as we know, to date, the number of cells in which Mecp2 has been fully restored has been quite limited. Recently, it was demonstrated that a mixed modality approach including an antisense oligonucleotide (ASO) against Xist, the noncoding RNA responsible for X inactivation, and an inhibitor of DNA methylation, can achieve a 30,000-fold reactivation of Mecp2 ( Carrette et al., 2017 ).
In pursuit of therapeutic intervention for MECP2 duplication disorder Zoghbi and colleagues at the BCM-IDDRC targeted the MeCP2 protein itself. First, using genetics they showed that restoring MeCP2 levels to normal rescues duplication-like phenotypes in the MDS mouse model. To explore a strategy that has the potential for translation, they used antisense oligonucleotides that target the human MeCP2 protein encoded by the human transgene. They discovered that normalizing MeCP2 levels in adult mice reversed all the duplication phenotypes including anxiety, autism-like features, seizures, synaptic plasticity, EEG abnormalities, and gene expression changes ( Sztainberg et al., 2015 ). These findings inspired new studies to identify druggable targets that modulate MeCP2 levels. From a genetic screen of kinases and phosphatases, they identified four targets that modulate MeCP2 levels and discovered a key residue on MeCP2, Serine 216, that is phosphorylated by two of the targets Hipk1 and Hipk2 which in turn affects MeCP2 stability ( Lombardi, et al., 2017 ). These data suggest that genetic screens are likely to reveal modulators of MeCP2 that are potentially druggable. Moreover, the strategy will also allow identification of targets that can increase MeCP2 levels, which might help people with T158M mutation given the recent data from the Zhou lab in the IDDRC at CHOP/Penn ( Lamonica et al., 2017 ).
The promising interventions that improve or reverse symptoms in mouse models give great hope to the RTT community that deciphering the basic biology of MeCP2 is in our reach. Yet no treatment targeting the downstream consequences of MECP 2 mutations is considered to be widely effective ( Glaze et al., 2017 ; Glaze et al., 2009 ; Khwaja et al., 2014 ; O'Leary et al., 2018 ). A multi-site clinical trial for gene therapy directly targeting MECP2 expression is under preparation and may be launched as early as the end of 2020 pending U.S Food and Drug administration approval. However, the number of completed, ongoing or planned clinical trials is continually rising (currently as we are writing we are at 59, https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/results?term=rett+syndrome ), and with each one comes a better understanding of what may or may not be worth pursuing further. A review by Katz et al. (2016) summarizes completed clinical trials and their outcomes and discusses how the field can learn from past trials and plan for the future. Some of the most recently completed clinical trials include IGF-1, NNZ-2566, EPI-743, ω−3 PUFAs, Glatiramer acetate (Copaxone), statins, and Desipramine. Ongoing and recruiting trials include Sarizotan, Ketamine, Fingolimod, Dextromethorphan, and Cannabidiol. The existing knowledge of the molecular, cellular and circuit mechanisms underlying postnatal development, plasticity and mature function of sensory areas, and the preservation across species of the fundamental processes, represent a powerful tool in the identification of novel intervention strategies. Unsuccessful clinical trials must be used to design better ones closely paralleling the intervention done at the preclinical level (when, how long and how much) and with more sensitive outcome measures ( Sahin et al., 2018 ).
The past few years have been filled with discoveries leading to greater insight into how MECP2 mutations lead to RTT. From basic biological research, to translational and preclinical studies, and all the way to clinical research and clinical trials, each step is crucial in the quest to treat RTT effectively. Going forward, it will be necessary to prioritize several approaches in order to maximize success in achieving these goals.
First, reliable biomarkers and outcome measures must be identified that can be directly translated from animal models to patients. This is critical in order to accurately assess the efficacy of new treatments being tested and currently a major limitation in clinical trials. Second, because RTT is a dynamic disorder involving stagnation and regression of development in early postnatal life, studies should be designed whenever possible as longitudinal to analyze trajectories rather than taking snapshots in time both in animal models and in patients. Third, reproducibility of results must be improved by conducting studies at multiple locations and with a significantly higher number of subjects examined. This applies to pre-clinical and clinical studies.
The progress made in the last few years is the result of a global effort to decode this complex disorder by the synergistic collaboration among scientists, advocacy groups and funding agencies. NIH funded IDDRC centers represent a great opportunity to lead and train the next generation of clinicians and researchers.
It takes a village to raise a child, it takes the world to cure MECP2 disorders.
This work was supported by the Eunice Kennedy Shriver National Institute of Child Health and Human Development U54 Grant (HD090260) to the Human Clinical Phenotyping Core of the Rose F. Kennedy Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center (SM); Rett Syndrome Research Trust grant to SG, and an NIH grant 4T32HD040127-15 to SS. Indirect administrative support for SJG was provided by Research to Prevent Blindness to the UNC-CH Department of Ophthalmology IDDRC center grant (U54HD090256) (QC); NIH NINDSROS1NS095959 and Children's Hospital Boston Intellectual And Developmental Disabilities Research Center (BCH IDDRC 1U54HD090255) (MF); U54HD086984 (ZZ).
Elsa of Arendelle is a fictional character who appears in Walt Disney Animation Studios ' 53rd animated film  Frozen (2013) and its sequel and 58th animated film  Frozen II (2019). She is voiced mainly by Broadway actress and singer Idina Menzel , with Eva Bella as a young child and by Spencer Ganus as a teenager in Frozen . In Frozen II , young Elsa is voiced by Mattea Conforti (at the start of the film) and Eva Bella (archive audio).
Created by co-writers and directors Chris Buck and Jennifer Lee , Elsa is loosely based on the title character of " The Snow Queen ", a Danish fairy tale by Hans Christian Andersen . In the Disney film adaptation, she is introduced as a princess in the fictional Scandinavian Kingdom of Arendelle , heiress to the throne and the elder sister of Anna ( Kristen Bell ). Elsa has the magical ability to create and manipulate ice and snow. She inadvertently sends Arendelle into an eternal winter on the evening of her coronation. Throughout the film, she struggles first with controlling and concealing her abilities and then with liberating herself from her fears of unintentionally harming others, especially her younger sister.
The Snow Queen character, neutral but cold-hearted in the original fairytale and villain in numerous adaptations of the character, proved difficult to adapt to film due to her transparent depiction. Several film executives, including Walt Disney , attempted to build on the character, and a number of scheduled film adaptations were shelved when they could not work out the character. Buck and his co-director, Jennifer Lee , were ultimately able to solve the dilemma by depicting Elsa and Anna as sisters. As much as Anna's struggle is external, Elsa's is internal. This led to Elsa being gradually rewritten as a sympathetic, misunderstood character.
Elsa has received largely positive reception from reviewers, who praised her complex characterization and vulnerability. Menzel was also widely praised for her vocal performance of Elsa, especially that of her performance of the song " Let It Go ".
An illustration of the Snow Queen , the character Elsa is based upon.
Attempts were made as early as 1937 by Walt Disney to adapt Hans Christian Andersen's fairy tale, " The Snow Queen ", into a film. The tale focuses on two children, one named Gerda, who served as the basis for Princess Anna , and the other named Kai, who is "cursed with negativity" after his eyes are pierced with shards of glass from an enchanted mirror and is later kidnapped by the Snow Queen. [9] [10] However, Disney struggled with creating a believable, multi-dimensional adaption of the fairy tale's title character , [11] who was intended to be a villain. [12] In the story, she is described as "a woman, dressed in garments of white gauze, which looked like millions of starry snow-flakes linked together. She was fair and beautiful, but made of ice-shining and glittering ice. Still she was alive and her eyes sparkled like bright stars, but there was neither peace nor rest in their glance." [11] Disney was unable to find a way to make the Snow Queen more real and eventually abandoned film plans. [11]
Several film executives later made efforts towards the project, including Paul and Gaëtan Brizzi , Dick Zondag, Glen Keane , and Dave Goetz. In 2011, director Chris Buck began work on another attempted adaption and also faced challenges with the Snow Queen character . Producer Peter Del Vecho explained that this was primarily because she was not relatable and too isolated, having no personal connections. As a result, they could not explain her motivations. After several changes were proposed, someone on the writing team suggested making the Snow Queen Anna's sister. "Once we realized that these characters could be siblings and have a relationship, everything changed," Del Vecho relayed. [11]
The Snow Queen, now given the name Elsa, continued to be cast as a villain, [13] and Disney released the following synopsis for Frozen in May 2013:
When Anna is cursed by her estranged sister, the cold-hearted Snow Queen, Anna's only hope of reversing the curse is to survive a perilous but thrilling journey across an icy and unforgiving landscape. Joined by a rugged, thrill-seeking outdoorsman, his one-antlered reindeer and a hapless snowman, Anna must race against time, conquer the elements and battle an army of menacing snowmen if she ever hopes to melt her frozen heart. [9]
Earlier manuscripts included more antagonistic actions by Elsa, such as intentionally cursing Arendelle with an eternal winter. Additionally, she is shown creating an army of snowmen similar to the original Snow Queen's army of snowflakes; the comedic character of Olaf was at the time written as a smaller snowman who was cast out by Elsa for being too unintimidating. [9] [14] Within two months, however, scripts were altered to give emphasis to her lack of control over her powers. [15] Olaf was reduced to the only snowman created by Elsa, and he instead serves as a reminder of the sisters' childhood friendship. [16] In the final version, Elsa creates a single giant snow creature that Olaf nicknames "Marshmallow" to act as a guard after being branded as a monster for her powers. [15] According to director Jennifer Lee, the character ultimately became more of a composite of both Kai and the Snow Queen, enhancing her increasingly sympathetic portrayal. [10] Del Vecho added, "There are times when Elsa does villainous things but because you understand where it comes from, from this desire to defend herself, you can always relate to her." [17]
Idina Menzel provided both the singing and speaking voice of Elsa.
Eva Bella and Spencer Ganus were cast to portray Elsa as a young child and as a teenager, respectively. [18] [19] Actress and singer Megan Mullally was originally cast to voice an adult Elsa, [20] but was replaced by Idina Menzel . Menzel already knew Kristen Bell , [21] who voiced Anna, and had previously auditioned for a lead role in the 2010 Disney film Tangled . [22] She was not cast for the part, but the casting director recorded her singing and later showed the recording to Frozen ' s film executives. [22] Menzel was surprised when she was subsequently asked to audition, [22] and she received the role after reading the script out loud. [21] In interviews, she acknowledged similarities between Elsa, her then-current role, and Elphaba, her previous role. [23] Namely, she said, they were both very powerful and very misunderstood individuals. [24]
Director Chris Buck believed that Menzel's vocals would help in the portrayal of the character, saying, "Idina has a sense of vulnerability in her voice. She plays a very strong character, but someone who lives in fear-so we needed someone who could portray both sides of the character, and Idina was just amazing." [25] Menzel was unaccustomed to working with animated films and being required to portray her character's feelings with her voice alone, though she did not find it particularly challenging. [24] While recording, she was able to "play" with her voice, trying various tones to establish the ranges in Elsa's emotions. For example, Menzel wanted there to be a difference between the ways she sounded when she was being bold and when she was angry. [21] She would also physically restrict her hands from moving as she recorded the film's early scenes in order to project how her character was "so afraid to move and feel anything that it would come out and hurt people". [26]
During production, Menzel and Jonathan Groff , who portrays Kristoff , went to the animation studio to explain to the animators how they were approaching their characters. [27] Animators asked Menzel questions about her singing, observed how she breathed as she sang live, and made videorecordings of her recording sessions; they then animated Elsa's breathing to match Menzel's breathing, for further realism. [26] [28] Her voice supplied inspiration for Elsa's most prominent song, "Let It Go". According to composer Robert Lopez , Menzel's vocal range was able to clearly convey Elsa's "low, vulnerable, fragile side" as well as her power and self-realization. [29] Menzel commented that it was "an honor" to have the song and that she enjoyed recording it. "It's a collision of a bunch of forces that are all coming together in the right way," she explained. "The character, what she is singing and what she is experiencing; beautiful lyrics, beautiful melody and a little bit of me." [26] Buck and Lee were also surprised by how compatible Menzel and Kristen Bell's voices were. At one point during a table read, they sang a ballad (later revealed as " Wind Beneath My Wings " [30] ) back and forth to one another with so much sentiment that it reportedly left everyone who was present with tears in their eyes. [31] Subsequently, Lee wanted Menzel and Bell to be in the same room when they were recording the important emotional scenes of the film. [32]
Following the casting of Idina Menzel, Elsa's characterization underwent several alterations. According to Menzel, she was originally scripted as a one-dimensional antagonist but was gradually revised as a more vulnerable, multifaceted figure. [33] Menzel further described her character as "extremely complicated and misunderstood". [25] Director Jennifer Lee stated that Elsa is largely driven by fear throughout the film, [34] while Menzel added that she was also struggling with her potential to be "a strong, powerful, extraordinary woman". [21] Executive producer and animator John Lasseter became very "protective of Elsa" and was adamant about portraying her in a more favorable, sympathetic light. [35] Writer and director Jennifer Lee stated on Twitter that Elsa's body language and mannerisms were "intentional to show anxiety and depression". [36] In July 2013, Disney released images of the film's main characters along with outlines of their roles in the story. Elsa received the following description:
From the outside, Elsa looks poised, regal and reserved, but in reality, she lives in fear as she wrestles with a mighty secret-she was born with the power to create ice and snow. It's a beautiful ability, but also extremely dangerous. Haunted by the moment her magic nearly killed her younger sister Anna, Elsa has isolated herself, spending every waking minute trying to suppress her growing powers. Her mounting emotions trigger the magic, accidentally setting off an eternal winter that she can't stop. She fears she's becoming a monster and that no one, not even her sister, can help her. [37]
Elsa's supervising animator was Wayne Unten, who asked for that role because he was fascinated by her complexity. [38] Unten carefully developed Elsa's facial expressions in order to bring out her fear as contrasted against Anna's fearlessness. [38] For their work on designing and animating Elsa, Unten and three other Disney Animation employees later won an award for Outstanding Animated Character in an Animated Feature Motion Picture at the 2013 Visual Effects Society Awards : Joy Johnson, character technical director ( rigging ); Alexander Alvarado, look development artist (Disney's job title for texture artists ); and Chad Stubblefield, modeling supervisor. [39] FX technical director Yoo Jae-hyun worked for a year and a half on creating Elsa's ice-based special effects, including effects associated with her dress. [40] [41]
Producers identified the scene in which Elsa sings "Let It Go" as a pivotal point in the character's development. The scene depicts her choice to "let go" of her fear of using her powers. Character design supervisor Bill Schwab said, "Before 'Let It Go', Elsa is really buttoned up, her hair is up-everything is perfect. During the song, she gives herself permission to be who she is and everything changes-her hair is more wild, her gown is magical. She's finally free-even if she is all alone." [25] Animators designed Elsa's appearance to reflect her metamorphosis; in the beginning, she is shown primarily in restrictive and confining outfits. [42] In a January 2014 interview with John August and Aline Brosh McKenna , Lee disclosed that Lasseter personally helped with conceptualizing Elsa's physical transformation: "[M]y favorite thing about it ... is the actual model for doing it was John Lasseter .... he was a huge help in talking through how we translate that emotional journey ... with the animation ... [H]e got up and he's like, .... 'her hair goes, and she transforms, and she struts,' and he's doing it. He's acting it out." [43]
"We imagined what it would be like to be chased out of the kingdom. To have to let go of everything you know and all the people you love. And yet the incredible release you'd have to finally let go of everything you've holding back your entire life."
- Kristen Anderson-Lopez on writing Elsa's song, "Let It Go", and the choice to make her a protagonist rather than a villain. [44]
The scene was also a pivotal point in the development of Elsa's character and was initially planned to depict her becoming evil. Robert Lopez, who composed the song with his wife, Kristen Anderson-Lopez, explained, "Elsa was going to go from being this perfect princess that had tried to keep her personality down her whole life to saying, 'Screw it. I'm gonna be me.'" [44] They had wanted to use the song as a way to gain a better understanding of the character and what she would be like if she was no longer living in fear, which ultimately resulted in her becoming much more complex. [31] The final lyrics and Menzel's "ability to be so fragile and vulnerable and then break into this powerhouse voice" turned the plot around and led to Elsa being revised as a "good" character. [44] She initially attempts to suppress her powers in order to avoid hurting others, particularly Anna, and when she is no longer able to do so, she banishes herself from the kingdom to protect those around her. [25] [45] Lead writer Paul Briggs said that Anna's support is what Elsa needs most when her secret is exposed. "The strength of the family bond is what makes this story so powerful," he explained, "because it's her sibling who's willing to look beyond her powers and stand between her and the world if that's what it takes." [25]
Early concept art depicting a darker version of Elsa inspired by Amy Winehouse .
Elsa's appearance had to be redesigned following her transition from antagonist to protagonist . She was originally drawn in a style similar to other Disney villains, with blue skin and spiky black hair. [35] A few months after the film's release, visual development artist Claire Keane (the daughter of Disney Legend Glen Keane) published early concept art of Elsa that was modeled after the singer Amy Winehouse . [46] At the time, she was imagined as having blue " bouffant " hair as well as "a deep, soulful voice and dramatic mood swings". [46] Lasseter reportedly influenced the creation of the character's much softer final appearance, particularly in regards to her very thick platinum blonde hair, which animators found difficult to design. Art director Michael Giaimo said that while a number of strategies were proposed for Elsa's hair, Lasseter would push the animation team to continue making improvements, saying, "It's not aspirational enough. We want people to feel like this hair is a beautiful statement." [47] During a research trip, producers found that "there are lots of braids " worn by women in Norway; they then hired a stylist from New York named "Danilo" who helped to create a style that would reflect that while still being "a little different". [48] [49] [50] A new animation program called Tonic was invented to assist with the task, and the character's hair ultimately required 420,000 CGI threads. [42] [51] By contrast, Anna was given roughly 140,000 hairs [48] [52] while Rapunzel from Tangled had only required 27,000 CGI threads for her hair. [51]
In early 2018, discussions from within Disney Studios were publicized which centered on Elsa's possible development as lesbian in Frozen II . [53] [54] [55] However, this was later debunked when the Anderson-Lopezes confirmed that Elsa would have no love interest in the movie. [56] Lee later explained to Maureen Dowd that they had put the characters through Myers-Briggs tests , and "[i]t really came out that Elsa is not ready for a relationship." [57]
Since Elsa is introduced as a young child at the beginning of the film, animators wanted the first glimpse of her powers to reflect her innocent and fanciful state of mind at the time. This included giving her first snowflakes a simple design. Her snow and ice patterns later become more intricate and complex when she is an adult. Co-effects supervisor Marlon West elaborated, "When Elsa finally lets go and really starts owning her cryokinetic abilities, we wanted the ice and snow that she make to get across the idea that Elsa has now grown up and become this beautiful, elegant, confident and powerful young woman." [58]
Her ice castle, which she creates while singing "Let It Go", was designed to illustrate the maturing of her powers as well as to be "a manifestation of her feelings to the world". [58] [59] The palace is initially beautiful; however, after she is made aware of the destruction she has inadvertently caused, and as she is increasingly vilified and hunted by others, it becomes darker and more distorted, with jagged icicles forming on the walls. The film's design team was uncertain about how it should look and drew out designs for various ice castles filled with snow. Lasseter suggested basing the structure and patterns on snowflakes. For example, an enormous snowflake would serve as the foundation, and the palace would be hexagon-shaped. Lasseter also wanted snowflake patterns to influence the manner in which Elsa creates the palace. "Snowflakes are these tiny little ice crystals that form in mid-air. And when there are changes in temperature and humidity, these snowflakes start growing in a pattern that's known as branching and plating," said co-effects supervisor Dale Mayeda. "[Lasseter] said 'You know, when Elsa builds her ice palace, it would be so amazing if-every step of the way as this castle forms out of thin air-it's just branching and plating, branching and plating all along the way." [58]
Fifty animators worked on the scene in which the castle is built, and one frame required 30 hours to render . [58] They later extended similar techniques to Elsa's clothing. While the traditional Norwegian rosemaling was the inspiration for her costuming early in the film, her ice gown was designed similarly to her palace, with snowflakes heavily influencing the style. Her cape itself is a large snowflake. [32]
Italian actress and singer Serena Autieri and the Italian cast of Frozen were awarded best foreign dubbing worldwide
The Sami language version was announced as a special dubbing chosen for the inspiration the second movie took from the Sami culture . [60] [61]
A major challenge was to find sopranos capable of matching Menzel's warm vocal tone and vocal range in their native languages. [62] [63] Rick Dempsey, senior executive at Disney Character Voices International regarded the process as "exceptionally challenging", explaining, "It's a difficult juggling act to get the right intent of the lyrics and also have it match rhythmically to the music. And then you have to go back and adjust for lip sync! [It]... requires a lot of patience and precision." [64] Just like Idina Menzel, four of Elsa's dubbers also played the role of Elphaba in Wicked , that is: Maria Lucia Rosenberg ( Danish ), [65]  Willemijn Verkaik ( Dutch and German ), [66] [67] Mona Mor ( Hebrew ) and Hyena Park [ ko ] ( Korean ). [68] [69]  Serena Autieri , along with the whole Italian version of Frozen , was awarded best foreign dubbing worldwide. [70]
Dutch singer and actress Willemijn Verkaik dubbed Elsa in Dutch (both speaking and singing) and German (singing only), Spanish singer Gisela sang both for the European Spanish and Catalan versions and French singers Anaïs Delva 's and Charlotte Hervieux's singing lines from Frozen and Frozen II respectively were also used in the Canadian French version, while Canadian actor Aurélie Morgane voiced Elsa's spoken parts in both movies in the Canadian French version. Both Anaïs Delva (French) and Jelena Gavrilović ( Serbian ) had originally auditioned for Anna's role, but were eventually called back to dub Elsa instead. Priyanka Chopra and her cousin Parineeti Chopra voiced Elsa and Anna respectively in the spoken parts in Frozen 2 in Hindi . [71]
Given the success raised by the song " Let It Go " not only in Menzel's version, but also in its 41 versions originally issued worldwide, on April 15, 2014, Walt Disney Records released a compilation album titled Let It Go: The Complete Set , with all 42 foreign-language film versions of "Let It Go" and nine end credit versions. [72] On the wake of the success of international versions of the first movie, on February 9, 2020, when Menzel and Aurora performed the song " Into the Unknown " during the 92nd Academy Awards , nine of Elsa's international dubbers were also called to sing one line each in as many different languages: Maria Lucia Rosenberg in Danish, Willemijn Verkaik in German, Takako Matsu in Japanese , Carmen Sarahí in Latin American Spanish , Lisa Stokke in Norwegian , Kasia Łaska in Polish , Anna Buturlina in Russian , Gisela in European Spanish and Gam Wichayanee in Thai . [73]
Elsa, princess of Arendelle and heiress to the throne, is born with the ability to create and control ice and snow. As a child, she uses her abilities to create a winter wonderland to play in with her younger sister and best friend, Princess Anna. One night, Elsa accidentally harms Anna with her powers. The king and queen of Arendelle hurriedly take Anna to a tribe of mountain trolls to be healed. While healing Anna, the trolls inform the royals present that Elsa's abilities will grow, becoming both beautiful and very dangerous so she must learn to control them. While the trolls erase Anna's memory of the incident and of her elder sister's powers in general, Elsa is traumatized by the event. The king and queen take steps to control and hide Elsa's ice powers: the castle gates are locked, Elsa is shut away in her bedroom for most of the time, she is given gloves to help suppress her powers and is told to hold in her emotions as well. Nonetheless, her powers continue to grow even stronger and so she becomes terrified of harming those she cares about most. Meanwhile, her sister Anna is less happy and confused by the loss of contact with her elder sister and tries, without success, to coax her out of her room. When the sisters grow into teenagers, the ship in which the king and queen are sailing is capsized in a storm and they drown, leaving Anna and Elsa feeling even more lonely.
Three years pass, and Elsa, now of age, is set to formally succeed her father as the monarch of Arendelle. Though she is afraid of opening the castle to the large crowds, her coronation goes on relatively peacefully. However, at the reception party, Anna asks for Elsa's blessing to marry Prince Hans of the Southern Isles , whom Anna had met earlier that day. Elsa refuses on the basis that Anna and Hans barely know each other, and an argument ensues, escalating until Elsa loses emotional control and accidentally reveals her power. Upon the guests' and her subjects' horror and being accused of sorcery and called a monster by the Duke of Weselton, Elsa flees the castle and retreats into the icy mountains. In the process, her emotions unleash an "eternal" winter throughout Arendelle. While there, she decides to embrace, finally, all her powers and builds an enormous ice palace where she believes she can live freely without fear of hurting people. She also rebuilds her childhood snowman, Olaf, and unknowingly brings him to life.
Anna, determined to find Elsa and bring her back, travels through the mountains, encountering Olaf and a mountaineer named Kristoff. They reach the ice palace, where Anna attempts to persuade Elsa to return home and mend their relationship. When Elsa ultimately resists (due to her memory of hurting Anna as a child with her powers resurfacing), Anna tells her about the state that Arendelle and its people were left in. Horrified, Elsa lashes out and accidentally freezes Anna's heart. Now even more terrified at the prospect of hurting her sister and people with her powers, Elsa forces Anna, Kristoff, and Olaf out by creating a gigantic snow creature (called Marshmallow by Olaf), a symbol of her desire to be alone so as to be able to use her powers without hurting anyone. After this, her ice castle evidently becomes darker and more grotesque, reflecting her torment and re-ignited fears. Meanwhile, Anna grows progressively weaker and Kristoff takes her back to the trolls, who tell them that only an "act of true love" can save her life.
Hans and a group of soldiers attack the ice palace. Elsa fights the Duke of Weselton's two soldiers who attempt to assassinate her. Hans convinces her to spare them to prove that she is not a monster. However, she is knocked unconscious and taken to her castle's dungeon, her hands cuffed and chained to the wall. Hans visits her and urges her to end the winter; Elsa admits that she has no idea how to do so. After he leaves, she is able to break free from the chains by freezing them and escapes the cell, though her fears trigger a massive blizzard. Anna returns to the castle, believing that a romantic kiss from Hans will be the "act of true love" to save her. Instead, he informs her that his offer of marriage had been the first step of a plot to steal the throne of Arendelle, and leaves her to die. Olaf tells Anna that Kristoff is in love with her and she believes that his kiss will cure her. They rush to find Kristoff. Hans confronts Elsa and tells her that she has killed Anna. Devastated, Elsa collapses and the blizzard stops suddenly. Hans approaches her and swings his sword to kill her, but Anna turns away from an approaching Kristoff with her last bit of strength and blocks Hans' attack as she freezes solid. Elsa then sees what has happened and discovers Anna's fate. Overwhelmed with grief, Elsa tearfully embraces the frozen Anna as Olaf and the guards look on.
Moments later, Anna begins to thaw, as her choice to save her sister rather than herself constituted the necessary "act of true love". Elsa realizes that love is the key to controlling her powers and is able to end the kingdom's eternal winter. Summer returns to Arendelle, Elsa regains the throne and is able to use and safely control her powers, while the sisters' bond is restored. She exiles Hans back to the Southern Isles to face punishment from his family, and cuts off trade with Weselton in retaliation for the Duke's earlier behavior towards her.
Nearly a year after the events of the first film, Elsa tries to make Anna's 19th birthday as perfect as possible a way of making up for the years they spent apart. To do so, she works heavily with Kristoff, Sven and Olaf to make this a reality. Upon making sure that her surprise party in the palace courtyard is ready, she leaves Kristoff in charge while she goes to get Anna. However, Elsa starts to come down with a cold as she leads Anna on a treasure hunt to find all the gifts that have been made for her. Without realizing it, each sneeze she makes creates small snowmen called "snowgies", which create trouble for Kristoff, Sven and Olaf. As Anna notices Elsa's cold getting worse, she tries in vain to get Elsa to stop exerting herself, even taking medicine from Oaken in case Elsa gets more sick. Unfortunately, Elsa's cold causes her to become very tired and behave in a seemingly intoxicated-like manner, and she almost falls off the Arendelle's clock tower only for Anna to save her. Upon finally admitting to Anna that she is indeed sick after the previous incident, she allows Anna to escort her home feeling she has ruined everything, and finds that the party has gone off successfully for Anna (as well as discovering her snowgie creations), and, still slightly delirious, she ends the party by accidentally sneezing into the birthday bugle horn, which inadvertently sends a gigantic snowball all the way to the Southern Isles and hits the now-demoted Hans, causing him to fall into a pile of horse manure. Afterwards, Anna tells a now bedridden Elsa that she has given her the best birthday ever: letting her take care of her.
Elsa appeared in a 21-minute holiday film along with Anna, Kristoff, Sven, and Olaf, which debuted in theaters for a limited time engagement [74] with Pixar 's Coco on November 22, 2017. [75] It made its television debut on ABC on December 14, 2017. [76]
Elsa and Anna host the first Christmas Holiday celebration in Arendelle since Elsa opened up the gate, ringing in the season by ringing the Yule Bell. When the townspeople unexpectedly leave early to enjoy their individual holiday customs, the sisters realize they have no family traditions of their own. Elsa laments the fact that because she had isolated herself most of her life, she and Anna were unable to spend time with each other, prompting Olaf to look for traditions with Sven's help. Meanwhile, she and Anna discover some forgotten items in their attic where they find things from their past before Sven returns to inform them of Olaf's plight. Leading the residents of Arendelle to go look for Olaf, they find him in a nearby forest and cheer him up by revealing that they do have a tradition: After Elsa had shut herself away for years, Anna began annually sliding cards and dolls of Olaf under her door. With that, Elsa and Anna continue the kingdom's festive celebrations.
Thirty-four years prior to the events of the film, King Runeard, the founder and the first king of Arendelle, establishes a treaty with the tribe of Northuldra by building a dam in the Northuldra's homeland, the Enchanted Forest, in order to maintain good relations between the two peoples and to strengthen their power. However, a fight occurs and enrages the spirits of earth, fire, air, and water who inhabit the forest. The spirits disappear and a wall of mist encases everyone in the forest. Runeard's son Prince Agnarr barely escapes with the help of an unknown savior and became a king.
Three years after her coronation, Queen Elsa of Arendelle celebrates autumn in the kingdom with her younger sister Princess Anna , Olaf the snowman , Kristoff the kingdom's ice harvester, and Kristoff's reindeer , Sven . When Elsa hears a mysterious voice calling out to her, she follows it and unintentionally awakens the elemental spirits, which forces everyone in the kingdom to evacuate. Grand Pabbie and the Trolls colony, aware of the situation, arrive at Arendelle and Pabbie informs them that they must set things right by discovering the truth about the kingdom's past.
Elsa, Anna, Olaf, Kristoff, and Sven embark to the Enchanted Forest, following the mysterious voice. The wind spirit, in the form of a tornado , appears and sweeps everyone in its vortex. Elsa stops it by firing streams of snow, forming a set of ice sculptures. They discover the sculptures are images from their father's past. They encounter the Northuldra and a troop of Arendellian soldiers who are still at conflict with one another. The fire spirit appears; Elsa discovers it to be an agitated magical salamander and calms it down. Elsa and Anna form a truce between the soldiers and the Northuldra, and go with them to their camp. Elsa later learns the existence of a fifth spirit who will unite people and the magic of nature, and also discovered that her mother was Northuldra.
Elsa continues to head north with Anna and Olaf. They find their parents' shipwreck and a map with a route to Ahtohallan, a mythical river told by their mother to contain all explanations of the past. Horrified that her parents were lost at sea in search of answers to her magical powers, Elsa decides to travel alone and sends Anna and Olaf away to safety, despite Anna reminding her of their mother's song "Go too far and you'll be drowned". Elsa encounters and tames Nokk , the water spirit who guards the sea to Ahtohallan. Reaching Ahtohallan, Elsa discovers that the voice was the call of Iduna, and that her power was a gift from the magic of nature because of Iduna's selfless act of saving Agnarr, making her the fifth spirit who unites differences. Elsa also learns that the dam was built as a ruse to reduce the Northuldra's resources because of Runeard's dislike of the tribe's connection with magic, and that Runeard was the one who initiated the conflict by killing the leader of the Northuldra. Elsa sends this information to Anna before becoming frozen, having ventured into the most dangerous part of Ahtohallan, which in turn causes Olaf to fade away.
Anna receives Elsa's message and concludes that the dam must be destroyed for peace to be restored, even though that would destroy Arendelle. Anna finds and awakens the sleeping gigantic earth spirits, and lures them towards the dam, which is destroyed by boulders hurled by the giants. Elsa thaws out and returns to Arendelle, stopping a wave from the destroyed dam. As the wall of mist disappears, Elsa reunites with Anna and revives Olaf. Kristoff proposes to Anna, who accepts. Elsa explains that she and Anna are now the bridge between the people and the magical spirits where the bridge has two ends-Anna on the people's side and Elsa on the magical spirits'. Elsa abdicates the throne of Arendelle to Anna, and becomes the protector of the Enchanted Forest, and regularly visits Arendelle as peace is restored throughout the lands.
Elsa and Anna together with the Disney Princesses appear in the film. In one scene, Vanellope Von Schweetz accidentally breaks into the Princess room, where Elsa and other princesses gather together. After a panic, they surround Vanellope and ask why she's here. After learning that Vanellope was a princess, Elsa asks "(Do you have) Magic hands?" while conjuring ice in her hands in front of her. [77] In the climax, Elsa and the princesses spot Ralph about to plummet to his doom from the air. The princesses rally together to rescue the bad guy, using their individual abilities to do so. Moana summons the ocean, which Ariel dives into to swim upward and create a spiral. Jasmine and Elsa fly towards the top using Carpet, from which they are able to join with Ariel. Elsa then uses her powers to create an ice slide for Ralph. After he is saved, the princesses introduce themselves as friends of Vanellope, with Elsa adding that anyone who is Vanellope's friend is their friend as well.
In December 2013, Disney began releasing "Musical Magic Elsa and Anna Dolls", which played their signature songs that appear in the film. [78] Numerous other doll versions of Elsa were released for purchase, including fashion doll sets, mini dolls, plush dolls, and Elsa-as-a-toddler dolls. [79] A dress up costume for children was modeled after Elsa's ice gown along with gloves similar to ones she wears in the film. [79] Together with Anna, she was depicted on various Frozen -inspired dishware such as plates and coffee mugs. [79] Other Elsa-inspired merchandise includes luggage, nightgowns, and home décor. [80] Additionally, simplified versions of the film were adapted to children's storybooks, including one with voice audio and another called A Sister More Like Me that was illustrated by Brittney Lee. [81] Elsa and Anna also both appear as playable characters in Disney Infinity through the use of their corresponding figurines. [82]
In early 2014, most Frozen merchandise, including dolls and dresses, were sold out nearly everywhere, including Disney stores and theme parks. [83] In early November 2014, Disney announced that it had sold over three million Frozen costumes in North America alone, of which Elsa was the no. 1 best-selling Disney costume of all time, followed by Anna at no. 2. [84] Hallmark created a Queen Elsa Christmas tree ornament after much interest was expressed when the Olaf ornament was announced in 2014.
Elsa meet-and-greet at Disneyland in California in 2013.
In November, before the release of Frozen , Anna and Elsa began making appearances at Walt Disney Parks and Resorts in Florida and California through meet and greets . In Walt Disney World , the attractions were set up in the Norway Pavilion of Epcot in recognition of the Scandinavian cultural elements that went into the film's design. [85] In Disneyland , a winter-themed cottage was set up in the Fantasyland section, with a talking audio-animatronic Olaf sitting on the cottage roof. [86] In February 2014, these meet-and-greet sessions were extended indefinitely, with wait time to meet the princesses frequently exceeding two hours, which is longer than any previous Disney characters. [87] [88] Additionally, Elsa, Anna, and Olaf were given a Frozen -themed float for Disneyland Paris ' Disney Magic on Parade . [89] On March 9, 2014, the three made appearances again on their own Frozen parade float in Festival of Fantasy Parade at Magic Kingdom theme park. [90] On April 20, 2014, Anna and Elsa moved from Epcot to the Princess Fairytale Hall at Magic Kingdom, with wait time to see the characters amounted to three hours, compared to Cinderella 's and Rapunzel's 15 minutes. [91] [92]
Elsa's performance of "Let It Go" became the central feature in Disney California Adventure 's Winter Dreams , [93] a 30-minute, winter-themed adaption of the nighttime show World of Color , which showcases scenes from Disney films. [94] Disneyland Paris' nighttime spectacular, Disney Dreams! , also added Elsa's performance of "Let It Go" to their attractions, [95] and she was given a similar role during the Magic Kingdom show, Celebrate the Magic , with her singing interspersed with scenes from the movie. [96]
On May 16, 2014, it was announced that Disneyland would debut a Frozen pre-parade featuring Elsa, Anna and Olaf. It premiered June 13, 2014, and preceded performances of Mickey's Soundsational Parade . [97] From July 5 to September 1, 2014, as part of 'Frozen' Summer Fun show at Disney's Hollywood Studios , Anna and Elsa will appear in a horse-drawn sleigh making their way down Hollywood Boulevard , alongside Kristoff and skaters, skiers and ice cutters in the Anna and Elsa's Royal Welcome section. The sisters also made appearances in For the First Time in Forever: A "Frozen" Sing-Along Celebration , where they were joined by royal historians to retell the history of Arendelle; and "Frozen" Fireworks Spectacular alongside Kristoff and Olaf, a fireworks display set to the music of Frozen . [98] [99] In response to strong demand, Disney Parks subsequently announced on August 7 that Frozen Summer Fun would be extended to September 28. [100]
On August 19, 2014, it was initially announced that Elsa & Anna's Boutique (replacing Studio Disney 365) would open mid-September in Downtown Disney at the Disneyland Resort . The opening date was later changed to October 6, 2014, and the store name was changed to "Anna & Elsa's Boutique". The location includes products inspired by Anna, Elsa, and Olaf. [101] [102] [103] [104]
While there had not been any official announcements from Disney regarding a coronation for Anna and Elsa, it had been announced in late August 2014 that a special character meal would be held by a group of travel agents in the morning of September 24, 2014. While not officially organized by Disney, the event, called My Royal Coronation , would feature the official Anna and Elsa characters owned by Disney with assistance from the company. [105] On September 12, 2014, Walt Disney World announced that a Frozen attraction was scheduled to open in early 2016 at Epcot's World Showcase in the Norway pavilion, replacing the park's Maelstrom ride. The attraction features the kingdom of Arendelle with music and scenes from the film, as well as meet-and-greets with Anna and Elsa. [106] [107] Anna, Elsa, Kristoff, and Olaf will make appearances in Mickey's Once Upon a Christmastime Parade , offered during Mickey's Very Merry Christmas Party at Magic Kingdom in November and December 2014 [106] (from November 7 to December 31). [107] Also starting from November, every night Elsa will use her powers to transform Cinderella Castle into an ice palace. [106]
On November 13, 2014, prior to "A Sparkling Christmas" Event, Anna and Elsa began meet-and-greet sessions at Hong Kong Disneyland . [108]
Beginning December 20, 2014, the Anna and Elsa meet and greet at Disneyland Resort was moved from Disneyland park to a new location in the Disney Animation Building called "Anna and Elsa's Royal Welcome" in Disney California Adventure . In addition, the Storybook Land Canal Boats at Disneyland were updated to include the village of Arendelle from the film, including Anna and Elsa's castle and Elsa's ice palace. Officially starting January 7, 2015, Elsa began making appearances alongside Anna and Kristoff at Disney California Adventure in " For the First Time in Forever-A Frozen Sing-Along Celebration " in Hollywood Land as part of the park's "Frozen Fun" event. Also starting January 7, Anna and Elsa made appearances in a Frozen play at the Royal Theatre in Disneyland park. [109] [110]
Beginning May 22, 2015, Disneyland debuted a new nighttime parade called " Paint the Night ", which includes a Frozen float featuring Anna, Elsa, and Olaf, as part of the park's 60th anniversary celebration. [111]
Elsa has become very popular in the cosplaying community. Cosplayer Anna Faith is well known for cosplaying as Elsa at charities, comic-cons, and other events. [112] [113]
A version of Queen Elsa appears at the conclusion of the ABC fantasy drama series Once Upon a Time ' s third season, released from an urn in which she had been sealed. She walks into Storybrooke searching for Anna. In the fourth season, she forges an ice wall that seals the town in and learns she has an aunt she was never told about named Ingrid who has the same ice powers as her. She is a proponent of Emma Swan and Killian Jones ' then-budding relationship. She is portrayed by Georgina Haig . [114]
Caissie Levy originated the role of Elsa in the Broadway musical , which opened in March 2018. [115] [116]  Ciara Renée succeeded Levy in the role in 2020. [117] Other notable actresses who have played the part include Caroline Bowman in the North American tour and Samantha Barks in the West End production. [118] [119] [120] The Broadway adaptation includes several new original songs for Elsa including "Dangerous to Dream" and "Monster." [121]
"Not content to merely turn True Love into a cautionary tale, [the writers] doubled down and made Elsa into [a] flawed hero warped by her upbringing and parents' heartfelt but damaging desire to keep their children safe...Elsa is aloof. And scared. And over-protective. And insecure. And full of guilt. Because people-even animated people-are the sum total of their personalities combined with their experiences. Which is something even live action films forget at least 63% of the time."
-Donna Dickens, entertainment editor. [122]
The character of Elsa was widely praised by reviewers for her multifaceted, evolving personality. Matt Goldberg of Collider.com commented that she was "an incredibly sympathetic character", [123] while Deepanjana Pal of Firstpost praised the decision to rewrite her as a protagonist and said, "Elsa is no evil, frosty vision of twisted and toxic maternity like the original Snow Queen . She's a young woman in difficult circumstances, frightened, trying to understand her abilities and burdened by expectation and convention. It's easy to sympathise with her and marvel at her ability when she builds her spectacular palace in the mountains. Next to her, Anna is very much a child who needs to grow up and she does in the course of the film." [124]  Stuff.co.nz ' s James Croot compared her "humiliation and exile" to that of Simba in The Lion King . [125] Katherine Webb, a reviewer for Wall St. Cheat Sheet , said that the scenes depicting Elsa gaining confidence and individuality delivered "an exciting message to send to young girls looking for a new princess role model". [126] Gary Wright of Rotoscopers state "Her mental anguish and uncontrollable powers define modern feminism. Elsa represents the boundless female spirit- strong and graceful, with the power to change the world." [127]
Travis Bean of Cedar Falls Times suggested that Elsa's ice powers, a "personal oddity" that made her self-conscious, as well as her selflessness in withdrawing into isolation in order to avoid hurting others allowed children to connect more with the plot of Frozen . [128] Laurie Levy from Chicago Now wrote that her young grandchildren "admired Elsa for being smart, strong, magical, and powerful" and did not care that she had no romantic subplot. [129] Magdalena Lachowicz, a film critic for The Heights , opined that Elsa's relationship with Anna was the most important part of the movie, [130] and Stephen Holden of The New York Times liked that, in departure from traditional Disney formula, it was a sibling's love rather than romantic love that was able to "thaw the icy heart of the frightened Elsa". [131] Tony Hicks of San Jose Mercury News wrote, "[Anna's] confusion and Elsa's anguish as she shuts herself away from the world-and her sister-is palatable." [132] Emma Koonse of Christian Post opined that together the sisters were Disney's "most lovable and charismatic characters yet", [45] and Debbie Lynn Elias of Culver City Observer commented, "Elsa and Anna are like two sides of a coin, both strong, albeit one through power and confidence and the other through clumsy sticktuitiveness and love." [133]  Polygon staff ranked her as one of their "69 biggest crushes of the last decade" and stated it "That moment in 'Let it Go' when she lets her hair down, changes into her ice dress, and does that little shimmy." [134]
Several reviewers commented that Elsa was more interesting than Anna, Frozen ' s primary protagonist. ABS-CBN writer Fred Hawson described Elsa as "an incredible character with a unique and interesting predicament because of the powers she possessed" and expressed the opinion that Frozen should have focused more on her rather than Anna. [135] Samra Muslim of The Express Tribune wrote that it was her presence that kept viewers "hooked" throughout the movie, elaborating, "Her character is complex and sympathetic and deserved to be explored even further. Instead the story revolves more around the relationship of the two sisters and Anna who is the typical, feisty, charming Disney heroine and her love trysts-instead of the alluring Elsa." [136]
The character was not devoid of criticism. Charlotte O'Sullivan from the London Evening Standard gave a more negative assessment of Elsa, saying that she "resembles one of those brittle mentors on The X Factor . Purple eyeshadow, tiny waist, kitten heels". [137] Anna Smith of The Guardian disliked that both Elsa and Anna were drawn with slender figures and large eyes as is typical of Disney princesses. [138]  Slate 's Dana Stevens wrote that "it's impossible not to thrill to Elsa's surging sense of power" but criticized the choice to illustrate her growing confidence by changing her appearance; Stevens further expressed concern that the switch from the character's modest coronation gown to "a slinky, slit-to-the-thigh dress with a transparent snowflake-patterned train and a pair of silver-white high heels" and a hairstyle that suggested "come-hither bad-girl seduction" was overly sexual. [139]  Christy Lemire compared Elsa to Carrie White , another well-known fictional female who unleashes magical powers when agitated. [140]
Idina Menzel also received praise for her singing, with Amon Warmann of Cine Vue saying her voice "positively soars in these musical ballads". [141] Reviewers frequently focused on her performance of "Let It Go", described by Entertainment Weekly ' s Marc Snetiker as "an incredible anthem of liberation" in which Elsa decides to no longer fear her powers. [142] Linda Barnard from The Star commented that Menzel "can shatter icicles with her powerful voice". [143]
Matt DeTruck of The Rochester City Newspaper wrote, "Menzel should be credited for providing as much power and passion to this performance as she did in her most famous role." [144] Donald Clark of Irish Times added, "Elsa's flight to the glaciers triggers a song that, in its defiant paean to self-reliance, could play comfortably beside camp showtune anthems such as I Am What I Am and Don't Rain on My Parade . The opening and closing choruses of Let It Go end with a sly, spat-out refrain: 'The cold never bothered me anyway!' You go, girl." [145] Nasim Asl of The Oxford Student continued, "Menzel, especially, steals the show with her performance of 'Let It Go'. Her Wicked -esque belting out works perfectly with such an incredible animated sequence-the building of the ice castle really demonstrates the prowess of Disney animation, and results in, arguably, one of the most spectacular power ballads seen by any animated character, ever." [146]
Frozen has been used to promote mental health awareness for children. [147] [148] [149] Elsa's storyline, more specifically, gave young and old audiences alike a glimpse into what it is like to battle mental illness, while delivering powerful messages of acceptance, empowerment and hope. [150] Jay Boll described Frozen as "a story of emotional dysregulation", with Elsa being the perfect metaphor for mental illness. "For the first time in a Disney animated feature, the villain is really the enemy within. Frozen has a minor bad guy whose true colors do not show until late in the story but the real antagonist is Elsa herself, as she battles with her inner demons." [151] [152]
Psychologist Nadia Ali of The Washington Post states that Elsa's behavior was strongly identical to her patients, trying to control and hide the evidence of their struggles for mental health - and the loneliness they often feel in doing so. "She [Elsa] sits slumped against the door of her room, forlorn and in despair... In this particular shot, Elsa and her bedroom are colored in dark shades. She sits alone with her demons after having tried unsuccessfully for most of her life to control and hide her powers, a task which has isolated her and torn her family apart." [153]
"Self-isolating, immobilized by the weight of personal expectations, and largely unable to experience joy, Elsa is the Anxious Girl's heroine", stated Jenny Singer of Glamour magazine. "Cinderella is an indentured servant, Moana is tasked with saving her people from mass starvation, and Belle is both a kidnapping victim and an adult literacy instructor, but they each maintain the cheeriness of Mrs. Maisel after an extra-large cold brew. That's the way some people function, and how nice for them! But... Elsa is the queen of feeling fear without succumbing to its darkness. She doesn't conquer her fear. She doesn't vanquish it. She lives with it." [154]
In December 2013, Elsa and Anna were both nominated for Best Animated Female by the Alliance of Women Film Journalists , with only Anna winning the award, a few weeks later. [155] Elsa won all three awards out of three nominations at the 2013 Visual Effects Society Awards, including Outstanding Animated Character in an Animated Feature Motion Picture , Outstanding Created Environment in an Animated Feature Motion Picture for her ice palace, and Outstanding FX and Simulation Animation in an Animated Feature Motion Picture for her blizzard. [39] [156] Her signature song, "Let It Go", won Best Original Song at the Academy Awards , [157] a Grammy Award , the Phoenix Film Critics Society Awards [158] and the Critics' Choice Awards , [159] and also received Golden Globe Award , [160] the Satellite Awards , [161] the Broadcast Film Critics Association Award, [162] and the Houston Film Critics Society Award nominations. [163]
Time ranked Elsa as the most influential fictional character of 2014. [164]
Disney's Frozen represents a landmark for the animation giant due not only to its immense popularity but also its introduction of the studio's first disabled princess. In order to make Elsa's story possible, the animators use a combination of narrative devices including the introduction of a second princess, whose story fulfills the audience's expectation for a traditional "princess journey," their patented aesthetic of cuteness, and the encoding of disability as fantasy. Although Elsa's disability is encoded as a magical ice power, the language the film uses to talk about her condition maps on to the experiences of people with physical, mental, and intellectual disabilities in recognizable ways. Meanwhile, her status as a much-beloved princess figure allows the animators at Disney to position disability as a universal experience and in turn to create empathy for PWDs both on and off screen.
During the airing of the ABC special The Story of Frozen: Making a Disney Animated Classic (2014), John Lasseter, the creative executive officer for Walt Disney studios, spoke openly for the first time about the connection between his most recent project and his son, who was diagnosed with juvenile diabetes at age 10. Lasseter recalled his son Sam's anxiety during the early stages of his condition with tears in his eyes, stating, "I thought of Sam, and I was thinking of Elsa. She was born with this. Why is she the villain?" Lasseter's revelation that Elsa was born with this condition, much like his son was genetically predisposed to diabetes, led him to call for a restructuring of the entire concept for Frozen from the script to the character design and soundtrack, thus beginning Elsa's transformation from villainous queen to sympathetic teen. Although Elsa is not the only character with disability in the Disney canon, she is the first princess 1 to be designed with disability in mind, and one of only two human characters with visible disability to make the cut at all since Quasimodo in The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996). As one of the newest members of Disney's royal family, Elsa is in a position to influence her audience in lasting ways. Studies have shown that children carry the values they have been taught by Disney characters, and specifically Disney princesses, with them into college and beyond. 2 Whether she is singing her trademark song, "Let it Go," in theaters, joking with her sister, Anna, on stage at the Magic Kingdom before she lights up Cinderella's castle, or beckoning to buyers in doll form from department store shelves, Elsa's brand wields a tremendous amount of cultural capital, and it would behoove scholars in both children's literature and disability studies to pay attention to what the Frozen line-and therefore Disney-is selling in regards to disability.
It is not surprising that Disney has been reluctant to revisit disability representation given Hunchback's poor reception by general audiences and the backlash against the film in the disabled community, both of which disability scholar Martin F. Norden has discussed in his work on disability in film. However, it was only a matter of time before Disney revisited the concept considering the steadily increasing awareness of persons with disabilities (PWDs) in the education system, the work world, and the marketplace since the introduction of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) in 1990. PWDs currently make up fifteen percent of the American population, making them the largest minority in the United States, and as the baby boomer generation continues to age, this number is likely to double. When we take into account caregivers and family members in addition to PWDs themselves, at least half the population is affected by disability in some way (Davis 4). Lasseter's story about his son's condition and his own change of heart is just one example of how disability is gradually gaining visibility and acceptance in this country. If the recent introduction of a growing number of characters with disability 3 into the Disney movie-line-up is any indication, the corporation is not only aware of this movement, but is also working to be a part of it. Henry Giroux and Grace Pollock argue that "Disney actively appeals to both conscientious parents and youthful fantasies as it works hard to transform every child into a lifetime consumer of Disney products and ideas" (xiii). As Disney's reach continues to extend not only across the age gap, but also around the globe, its consumer base is ever-widening. When the mouse "roars," we as viewers and consumers have been trained to listen, and now that the uproar has finally become about the way that PWDs are treated in this country and globally, we can only hope that more balanced, ethical representations of disability are on the horizon.
It is tempting to read Disney's rebranding of disability in Frozen as just another misappropriation of marginalized identity in a long line of transgressions, such as those committed in Pocahontas (1995) and Princess and the Frog (2009), both of which met with understandable hostility from critical race theorists. 4 However, in this article, I argue that by creating memorable characters that both normate 5 and disabled viewers can relate to, Disney advocates for a new understanding of identity-one that positions disability at its center. First, I discuss the history of disability representation in Disney films in order to contextualize Elsa's emergence as their first disabled princes. Next, I use Stuart Hall's theory of encoding and decoding to demonstrate how Disney encodes disability in Frozen using Elsa's ice powers, concluding with a meditation on the online community's willingness to embrace her as a character who embodies a myriad of disabled experiences. Building on this, I discuss the transformation Elsa underwent during her character design phase in order to achieve the aesthetic of cuteness necessary to create audience identification and empathy with the disabled body as a Disney brand. Finally, I conclude with a reflection on Disney's use of the princess as a familiar and much loved figure to create the impression that the disabled experience is a universal one. Although disability studies scholars have often rejected this rhetoric and have instead found power in identifying as a minority group, scholars including Lennard Davis and Tom Shakespeare have argued that this turn inward is largely counter-productive since it promotes separatism over inclusion and equality (Shakespeare 110). I will argue, therefore, that by emphasizing disability as a shared experience through Elsa, the creators at Disney are able to create empathy for PWDs both on and off screen and as such are able to advocate for acceptance and accommodation as inclusive moves that benefit all viewers, disabled and able-bodied alike.
There has been very little scholarly work done on disability representation in Disney films to date, and what there is focuses on their older films. It is only in the last few years that the writers and animators at Disney have begun to change the way they view-and encourage others to view-disability. Walt Disney Studios remains the front-runner in animated film making to this day, and as such they set the standard for other studios to follow. Lasseter's choice to send Frozen back to the drawing board (literally) once he realized Elsa's condition was an impairment outside of her control shows that Disney is finally ready to represent disability in an ethical way. This is exciting news, not only for the scholars working in both children's literature and disability studies, but also for the marginalized populations that we represent. Rather than continuing to focus on Disney's past crimes, it benefits us to look ahead to their future potential to change the way PWDs are treated for the better.
In order to contextualize Elsa's appearance as Disney's first disabled princess, I am going to begin with a brief chronology of disability representation in film. As numerous disability theorists have argued, television and film are awash in images of disability, yet viewers rarely notice or acknowledge their presence. Paul Longmore argues that when PWDs are represented in film, they are usually portrayed as either criminals or monsters. Norden builds on this analysis, adding that disabled people are almost always isolated from both other PWDs and the community at large. He goes on to offer several categories of disability representation including the Sweet Innocent, the Civilian Superstar, and the Obsessive Avenger. Moving forward, David T. Mitchell and Sharon L. Snyder advance the argument that the majority of representations of disability in film and literature are little more than "narrative prosthesis," explaining that "disability has been used throughout history as a crutch upon which literary narratives lean for their representational power, disruptive potentiality, and analytical insight" (49). Ato Quayson seeks to address what he sees as a limitation in Mitchell and Snyder's proposal of narrative prosthesis by proposing a new set of categories including "disability as moral test," "disability as epiphany," and finally "disability as normality" (52). Finally, Sally Chivers and Nicole Markotić propose a wider reading of cinema's representation of "problem bodies," as "a challenging multiplication of physical and social problems" (4). Although Disney's representations of disability have occupied numerous of these positions throughout history, as we will see, their most recent work comes closest to Chivers and Markotić's position that disability is both embodied and social, realistic and metaphorical.
Disney's own history of disability representation is fraught with problematic imagery and stereotypical representation. Beginning with Snow White and the Seven Dwarves ' Dopey (1937), who can be read as intellectually disabled, Disney has struggled to represent disability in a realistic and ethical light, due in part to their need to make the disabled character a cute object. Schwartz, Lutifiyya, and Hansen argue that Dopey is visibly Othered, partly due to the fact that he is much younger than the other dwarves and also because he is drawn as a "human with dog mannerisms and intellect" (qtd. in 183). Moving forward, Disney takes a different tactic in Dumbo (1941) by encoding disability into an animal character outright, this time a baby elephant. While the film attempts to advance a social critique about the treatment of PWDs through the treatment of both Dumbo and his mother, it ultimately resorts to supercripping when it is revealed that Dumbo can fly by flapping his inordinately large ears, thus earning him the love of both the audience and the other circus animals. Whereas both Snow White and Dumbo at least seek to make disability loveable, Peter Pan 's Captain Hook (1952) is little more than a revival of the disabled person as villain, albeit a funny, foppish villain. Beauty and the Beast (1991) once again attempts a social commentary, this time using a familiar fairy tale as its catalyst. Tammy Berberi and Viktor Berberi argue that Disney once again relies on the cute factor, focusing on Beast's human qualities in order to make him more of a victim than a monster.
Up to this point, Disney's forays into disability had been mostly fictitious-a silly dwarf, an elephant with overly large ears, a pirate in a children's fairy land, a prince transformed into a monster by a fairy's spell. It is not until the release The Hunchback of Notre Dame (1996) that Disney took their first pass at a realistic portrayal of disability, albeit with limited success. In the film, Victor Hugo's title character is oversimplified, remade into an "awkward child with self-esteem problems," who is oftentimes the butt of the depreciating humor of his imaginary gargoyle companions. (Norden "Disability and Otherness"167). As Norden argues, "Yes, it's a movie, but it's so much more than that; for disabled people, movies such as The Hunchback of Notre Dame are harmful and divisive expressions that reinforce negative beliefs that can lead to further discrimination" ("Disability and Otherness" 173). The film was panned by reviewers in both the U.S. and the U.K. for its oversimplification and misrepresentation of both Hugo's novel and the real-life issues PWDs face (Norden "Disability and Otherness" 168). Much more concerning, however, was the rise in violence against people with scoliosis in the U.K. in the months following the film's release (Norden "Disability and Otherness 173-4).
Given the film's poor reception, it is little wonder that Disney has been shy to venture into disability representation in the years that followed. It was not until 2012 that the animation giant released Wreck It Ralph 6 , one of whose protagonists, Vanellope von Schweetz, is a video game character with a "glitch" that causes her image to freeze-up and pixilate momentarily. Vanellope identifies with disability early on when she tells the other game characters that she has a "condition" known as "pixlexia." Vanellope's disability may be encoded as fantasy; however, she represents Disney's first foray into what Quayson terms "Disability as Normality" since she deals with real issues including social isolation and homelessness due to her physical difference. Unfortunately, despite the film's overwhelming success at the box office 7 , Vanellope has failed to attain the same visibility in Disney's canon that she enjoys in her own video game world. Wreck It Ralph appealed to an older audience including the male demographic traditionally aimed at by Pixar films 8 ; however, it failed to appeal to traditionalist Disney fans on the same level as the popular princess movies. As such, its marketing tapered off rather quickly, and it failed to become a household brand as is typical with more successful Disney films. Wreck at Ralph will be getting a sequel in 2018, which has the potential to relaunch Vanellope; however, since Frozen has already enjoyed a short film sequel, "Frozen Fever" (2015), has an upcoming Broadway release (2018), and will be launching its own full-length sequel (2019), it's unlikely that Wreck It Ralph will displace it as their number one anytime soon. As such, Elsa's position as Disney's first disabled princess becomes even more important since her film is garnering more attention than any Disney film ever made including golden-age classics like The Lion King and Beauty and the Beast .
Disney's Frozen began as a remake of Hans Christian Anderson's "The Snow Queen" (1844). In the original story, a girl must embark on a journey to save a friend taken captive by the evil Snow Queen after his head and heart are altered by the fragments of a demon mirror. Her love for her friend allows her to overcome obstacles and save him by melting away the fragments with her tears. Originally, Disney planned on following the original storyline; however, after Lasseter's change of heart, they reimagined the two female characters Anna and Elsa as sisters rather than rivals. In the revised version of the film, Elsa is born with the power to make ice and snow flow from her fingertips; however, when she becomes anxious or afraid, she is unable to control her magic. This leads to Elsa unintentionally plunging the country of Arendale into an eternal winter when she and Anna fight at her coronation ceremony. The villagers attack her, believing her to be a monster, and she flees her kingdom in fear. Anna then embarks on a journey to save both her sister and her home, meeting up with mountain man, Kristoff, his reindeer, Sven, and enchanted snowman, Olaf, along the way. After Elsa inadvertently freezes her sister's heart, Anna must seek true love's kiss to save her life. Initially, she and the audience both believe she needs Kristoff's kiss to save her; however, in the end, it is the sister's love for one another that saves them both.
Frozen seeks to capitalize on the successful representation of disability in Wreck It Ralph by once again encoding disability into a fantasy landscape. Disney's decision to encode disability as fantasy is not an altogether unprecedented move-they frequently attempt to encode race in their films, usually using animal characters to do so. 9 Sarah Turner uses Stuart Hall's theories of encoding and decoding to argue that the animation company enlists the premise of a magical spell to erase race and send audiences a positive message regarding colorblindness in The Princess and The Frog as the lead characters, Tiana and Naveen, spend the majority of the film as frogs hopping around the Louisiana bayou. Disney may have intended to preach racial equality by removing the characters from the racially charged atmosphere of 1920's New Orleans into the remote swamp region where alligators, frogs, and fireflies all work together towards a common goal. Unfortunately, by reducing their critique of racial inequality to one scene in the film wherein Tiana is told that a "a little woman of her background" wouldn't be capable of withstanding the societal pressures involved in running a restaurant, the company risks conflating sexism with racism and therefore eliding audience members' concerns about the dominant culture's indifference to the challenges minority groups face. Turner explains Halls theory as follows:
While the creators of the message 'encode' a particular ideology into a text…there is a moment, the moment of 'decoding,' that enables an alternate reading (either negotiated or oppositional) in opposition to the dominant reading embedded within the discourse of the text. Dominant readings and readers fully share in the ideological codes of the text; negotiated readings and readers partly share the text's code but have some questions or reservations, while oppositional or counter-hegemonic readings and readers understand the intended or dominant reading but reject it. (Turner 84-5)
In other words, although the majority of viewers are likely to adhere to the message Disney encodes, or embeds, into The Princess and the Frog supporting "colorblindness" as a form of equality, it can just as easily be decoded, or interpreted, by resistant audience members as apathy, or worse, outright prejudice. In the end, Tiana's film "fails to signify her color, clearly intrinsic to 'who' and 'what' she is," choosing instead to focus on her work ethic as the only thing necessary for her to "overcome" racism and thus erasing issues of discrimination and social inequality (Turner 84). This message is overwhelmingly rejected by reviewers as well as black audience members who understand the dangers of a colorblind ideology that refuses to confront institutional racism as a source of social injustice. Whereas Disney's attempts to be "colorblind" in The Princess and the Frog fail, I argue that the encoding of disability in Frozen is successful because the film never elides the social inequality Elsa is subjected to due to her difference. The film uses the device of two princesses in order to fulfill audience's expectations for a hegemonic princess journey through Anna while at the same time offering an oppositional disability counter-narrative using Elsa. In doing so, the studio creates a sense of audience comfort that allows them to advance a critique of the way society treats marginalized populations-something they were unable to fully achieve in either The  Hunchback of Notre Dame or Princess and the Frog .
When audiences flock to theaters to see a Disney princess film, they arrive bearing certain expectations for what I refer to as a "princess journey." Most princesses embark on an adventure that closely mirrors Joseph Campbell's famous hero's journey. Although Anna's journey offers viewers a feminist parody of the earlier princess stories in some ways, her story is familiar enough for audiences to recognize. There is a scene in Cinderella, for example, when the princess wakes up with perfect hair and makeup while birds dress her and brush her hair that Frozen parodies by showing Anna waking up in the morning with drool hanging out of her mouth and her hair standing up on one side. In addition, in a twist on Snow White's exhortation that "someday my prince will come," Anna rushes off to marry a man she's just met in order to have her "happily ever after," only to be told first by her sister and later by a second, better potential love interest that she's acting "crazy." 10 However, despite the comic twists and turns, Anna does provide viewers with what they have come to expect from a princess story. She is shut away due to her parents' decree that Elsa must never be seen. Next, she sings her "want song" 11 about opening the castle doors. Later, she heeds the call to action by following her runaway sister up the mountain into the wilderness threshold space. She meets helpers, Kristoff and his reindeer Sven, then later Olaf, the enchanted snowman. Together, they encounter obstacles as they work to find Elsa and undo the eternal winter she has unknowingly created. Along the way, Anna learns what true love is as she sacrifices herself for her sister. Her love for Elsa is the catalyst of her rebirth, and the story ends with her happily reunited first with her sister and later with Kristoff, her unlikely prince. Anna could easily stand alone as Disney's newest entry into the princess canon. She is courageous, funny, and most importantly, adorable. However, the story of Frozen doesn't end with Anna; rather, she shares the stage with her older sister, Elsa, whose story is unlike any Disney has ever told before.
The animators at Disney use the premise of two sisters in order to simultaneously meet their audiences' expectations with a traditional princess narrative and at the same time introduce a compelling counter-narrative about the way PWDs are treated in modern society. Thus, rather than erase disability, they conceal it in a second storyline that runs parallel to the first. They ground both sisters' stories in an endearing scene that takes place in their early childhood. Anna coaxes Elsa out of bed by asking her if she "wants to build a snowman," and Elsa responds by transforming the palace entry hall into a winter wonderland for her sister's amusement. At this point, Elsa's ability seems like something out of a fairytale; she can make ice and snow flow from her fingertips in order to create a winter wonderland anytime, anywhere. At this point, she could be mistaken for a typical princess; however, her story quickly turns dark. As Anna races around the castle, Elsa fears she may hurt herself and panics, accidentally hitting Anna in the forehead with a blast of ice. Anna collapses unconscious, and their parents rush into the room demanding to know what Elsa has done. While most children's stories would present an ability like Elsa's as a magical power, Frozen rejects this device early on to tell a different kind of story-one which positions disability at its center.
Elsa's disability may be encoded as a fantastic power, but the way her condition is discussed and managed links it unmistakably with impairment. Beginning with the king and queen's response to Anna's "accident," Elsa's power is treated as suspect in a manner that is reminiscent of Ernest Goffman's construction of disability as a stigmatized position. He explains, "The standards [the stigmatized person] has incorporated from the wider society equip him to be intimately alive to what others see as his failing, inevitably causing him…to agree that he does indeed fall short of what he really ought to be" (7). Elsa never has a chance to tell her story, or to try to undo the damage she has caused. Instead, the girls' parents rush to the trolls for help and advice, dragging Elsa in their wake. When the eldest troll sees Elsa, he immediately asks her parents whether Elsa was "born with the powers or cursed?" At no point is it implied that what she can do is a gift. This adds to the stigmatization since her ice power is linked with an "abomination of the body" (Goffman 4). The stigma surrounding Elsa's ability is further emphasized when the head troll erases Anna's memory of her sister's powers, telling her "it's for the best." Since he "takes the magic" but "leaves the fun," there's an implication that Elsa's ability is incidental to these memories rather than at the center of them.
The depiction of Elsa and her ability as dangerous is perpetuated in the scene that follows, which many disabled viewers have identified as the moment when they recognize Elsa as "like them." The head troll speaks directly to Elsa for the first time, telling her, "Your power will only grow. There is beauty in it, but also great danger. You must learn to control it. Fear will be your greatest enemy." As he is saying this, he conjures an image of the adult Elsa with a snowflake over her head. As young Elsa watches, the snow flake above the adult Elsa's silhouette turns from icy blue to blood red and a crowd of people gather around the image, attacking it. Young Elsa is, ironically, visibly frightened by this declaration, and she remains in this state for the majority of the film in part due to her parent's actions. Although other protagonists in Disney films fall under curses, like Aurora in Sleeping Beauty , Elsa is the first Disney princess to be accused of causing bad things to happen-this is a role normally reserved for Disney villains. Therefore, this scene, which takes place very early in the film, gives audiences their first cue that this is not simply a fairy tale, but also a story about social injustice.
The disability rhetoric in Frozen differs from that in most animated features in that it dwells on both Elsa's physical and mental difference, taking the time to show how her condition impacts her lived experience, rather than using her ice powers solely to forward the plot. Moritz Fink points out that in most animated social commentary "disability does not so much represent a deficiency or flaw but rather contributes to the destabilization of social hierarchies" (Fink 255). In animated programs such as The Simpsons , disability becomes what Mitchell and Snyder refer to as a narrative prosthesis, or a symbolic device meant to further the plot as is the case when Ariel loses her voice in The Little Mermaid . In Mitchell and Snyder's initial example, The Steadfast Tin Soldier , the soldier's missing leg is only mentioned as a way to single him out as worthy of a story. While Elsa's difference is the catalyst for the story in Frozen in that she inadvertently sets off an eternal winter, the majority of the plot actually focuses on the sisters' misguided attempts to protect one another. Elsa's ice powers are never questioned or explained; their origin remains a mystery, but not one that Disney is interested in solving. Instead, they focus on the way the society (mis)treats Elsa because of those powers, implying that discrimination is the real problem in need of a solution. In this way, they redirect the audiences' attention away from the expected fairytale and onto more realistic issues. Thus, instead of encoding a socially problematic motif like "colorblindness," they are actually encoding a message about inequality and unfairness as universal problems that all audience members can relate to and take action against.
Elsa's condition, which is triggered by fear and anxiety, is representative of not only physical but also mental and cognitive disability, as many viewers have noted. The mishandling of Elsa's condition by her parents resonates especially with those who live with anxiety and depression. As Margaret Price points out, it is a common misbelief that "mental illness…goes hand in hand with violent behavior," a prejudice stemming from the unending supply of misrepresentations available in media and film (2). Women in particular are prone to misdiagnosis and misunderstanding, particularly by neurotypicals who may ask them why they can't just "control themselves." As is the case with most invisible disabilities, Elsa is able to keep her condition hidden most of the time, only making herself known when she chooses. However, her impairment is "always ready to disclose itself, to emerge in some visually recognizable stigmata, however subtle, that will disrupt social order by its presence," as is the case for many people with invisible disabilities (Garland-Thomson Extraordinary Bodies 347). Sensing this danger, when the king and queen return home, they lock Elsa away in her room and forbid her from seeing her sister or anyone else in the kingdom. They present her with thick gloves to cover her hands, and instruct her, "Conceal, don't feel." Both the gloves, which serve as an unwanted prosthetic used to make her hands appear normative, and the instructions on how to suppress her power, represent an attempt at "curing" or "passing" that resonates with both physically and mentally disabled viewers. Since these viewers rarely see depictions of themselves as they really are-most Hollywood films prefer to represent disability as either monstrous or heroic, as discussed above-the representation of disability as the PWD experiences it is both refreshing and empowering.
Whereas viewers who identify as disabled are likely to appreciate the unflinching honesty present in Elsa's representation, normate viewers may experience a sense of growing discomfort. This is doubly true since it is Elsa's own parents, and not a discernible villain, who put Elsa into this isolated position. The audience, many of whom are parents themselves, are forced to take a hard look at the way we, as a society, demand that children who are different be made to either conform or be shut away. Elsa's confinement, first in her own room and later in a castle of her own making, can therefore be recognized as institutionalization. Elsa's experience of being locked in her room unable to open her door resonates with Simi Linton's recollection of "the institutions that have confined us, the attics and basements that sheltered our family's shame" (1). Even after the tragic death of their parents, Elsa continues to isolate herself, unable to break down the psychological barrier that her parents and the trolls have erected. This is in keeping with Norden's theory that PWDs are oftentimes depicted as isolated from both their families and communities and also from other PWDs. Rather than imply this is natural or inevitable, however, Disney uses Elsa's isolation to subtly critique the effect that institutionalization has on those with disability in the real, as well as the fictional, realm.
As the story progresses, and Elsa grows up, it becomes apparent that the society at large, rather than just her parents, is responsible for Elsa's poor treatment. The people's fear of Elsa is most evident at her coronation ceremony when Anna pulls off her glove during an argument. Without her glove, Elsa is unable to control her ability, and she erects a wall of jagged ice to force the people around her to back up and give her space. When they realize who and what Elsa is, the townspeople recoil from her in fear. Their looks recall Garland-Thomson's work on staring, in which she describes the stare as, "a more intense form of looking than glancing, glimpsing, scanning, surveying, gazing, and other forms of casual or uninterested looking." She argues that "staring registers the perception of difference and gives meaning to impairment by marking it as aberrant" ("The Politics of Staring" 56). Through their stares, the villagers transform Elsa into a monster, and she is forced to flee for her life not unlike Frankenstein's monster or Dracula in the familiar horror movies.
At this point in a Disney film, a character like Elsa would ordinarily transform into a villain-denied access to the party, no longer the "fairest of them all," most Disney queens would lash out and seek revenge on those who rejected them. Indeed, PWDs are oftentimes represented as the villains in films for both children and adults, as was the case in Peter Pan . In this film, however, Disney refuses the familiar stereotype of disability as monstrous or villainous, and retains the audience's empathy for Elsa, by following her journey up the mountain rather than remaining with the villagers down below. When Elsa reaches the mountaintop, she does not cry or rage, rather she initially berates herself in a move that is common among those who have been stigmatized by society. Her wildly popular anthem, "Let it Go" begins with the declaration that Elsa has found herself in a "kingdom of isolation / and it looks like I'm the queen" (lines 3-4). This is, again, in keeping with Norden's theory; however, whereas in most earlier films this isolation was both accepted by the victim and inevitably seen as "for their own good," Elsa's song indicates that it is her parents and society, rather than herself, who are to blame for her current situation. Her next lines, "Don't let them in / don't let them see / Be the good girl you always have to be" ventriloquize her parents harmful teaching (lines 8-10). At this point, Elsa wags her finger, admonishing herself as she remembers what she has been taught. By mid-song, however, she rejects this teaching, and with it her home and former identity, singing, "I don't care / what they're going to say / let the storm rage on / the cold never bothered me anyway" (lines 17-20). These lines are not only catchy, they also form an anthem of independence that resonates with both disabled and able-bodied audience members, all of whom can likely remember a time when they have had enough. Disney's classic songs, including The Little Mermaid 's "Part of Your World" and The Lion King 's "Hakuna Matata" are a large part of their film's popularity. They not only reinforce the films' imaginative world views, but they also create an empathic bond between audience and character, and "Let It Go," is no exception. In addition to empowering disabled viewers to take a metaphorical "stand" for their own rights, this song draws in normate viewers and helps them to see themselves as like Elsa, tired of being pushed around. Markotić and Chivers argue that "Disabled or not-when 'we' all watch a film, we all participate in disability discourse" (4). The "we" in this case is always suspect since normate viewers cannot ever fully embody the experience of fellow movie goers with disability; however, the move to identify with a character like Elsa rather than continuing to view her as Other is important since it opens up a space for dialog on how she and the real PWDs she represents are treated by society.
It is at this point that Elsa transforms visually, donning a new wardrobe to match her new attitude. There is a sense of relief in this moment as Elsa releases the tension that has been building around her character since the scene with the trolls. For audience members, the relief partially comes from both the realization that she is not so different from them after all. In addition, Elsa's song implies that she will not become an Obsessive Avenger, but rather she will content herself to reside in a beautiful ice palace of her own making, so the normate community has little to fear from her. For Elsa, however, the relief comes from no longer having to perform for that same normate audience. Goffman explains, "the stigmatized individual is likely to feel that he is 'on,' having to be self-conscious and calculating about the impression he is making, to a degree and in areas of conduct which he assumes others are not" (14). In the scene on the mountaintop, Elsa finally enacts a sense of play. Her face lights up as she creates a stairway into the unknown out of snow, and then later, she spins around in wonder as an entire palace made of ice, complete with a sparkling chandelier, rises up around her. At this point, Disney reimagines Elsa's "kingdom of isolation" as empowering-not for the normate community, but for Elsa herself since she no longer has to hide or pretend to be someone she is not. As her song ends, she makes direct eye contact with the audience before slamming the doors and effectively shutting out not only the people of Arendale, but also the viewer thus denying any attempts at disability voyeurism, another common issue in earlier representations.
Up to this point, there is a tension surrounding this film, stemming from Elsa's mistreatment by the community and her understandably angry response. The animators' choice to focus on inequality for the first act of the film is a major deviation from their flippant treatment of racial inequality in Princess and the Frog . If Disney continued to focus solely on Elsa and the injustice to which she was subjected as the film continued, it is very likely that viewers would reject the encoded message about the need for social reform on behalf of PWDs and instead begin to blame Elsa for what happens to her in an effort to shake off their own feelings of guilt. As it is, most viewers accept and to some extent internalize Elsa's rhetoric about disability, as I will demonstrate at the end of this section. Viewers are able to do so because the return to Anna's narrative takes them "off the hook" in two important ways. First, Anna's narrative returns them to the familiar realm of the princess story and therefore puts audiences back on solid ground, as I have demonstrated. Second, and perhaps more importantly, the film shifts the blame from the society at large onto a failed prince figure, Hans, therefore allowing audiences to do the same. On one level, Hans's role as a villain is similar to that of Gaston in Beauty and the Beast . He is drawn in the traditional prince style-blue eyed and handsome with a well-muscled physique that aligns him with the normate community. However, unlike Gaston, whom Belle rejects early on in her narrative, Anna believes Hans to be "the one" and agrees to marry him after meeting him only twice. Up until the middle of the film, he appears to be the ideal prince figure, a view that is only complicated by the entrance of the mountain man, Kristoff, who audiences are likely to find equally suitable for Anna. It is only after Anna leaves to find her sister that Hans shows his true colors as he sets off to track Elsa down himself with the intention of doing her harm and therefore steps into the role of villain.
Hans's behavior towards Elsa is once again a startlingly realistic depiction of how PWDs are treated, albeit encoded into a fairytale narrative. First, he directs all of his derogatory comments to Elsa outside of the villagers' earshot; in addition, his words always have a double meaning. For instance, he tells Elsa, "Don't be the monster they fear you are," implying that by refusing to be locked away, Elsa is somehow in the wrong. This is not unlike the rhetoric that employers sometimes use for not hiring PWDs; phrases like "it would create a hardship for you" or "it just wouldn't be fair to the other employees" abound in stories about PWDs struggles to find work despite the supposed protections offered by the ADA. Later, Hans tells Elsa, "You don't belong in this world. You don't belong anywhere, which is why I'm going to put you somewhere, where it's like you don't exist." Although at this point, he is threatening to once again lock her away, this time in the dungeon, his words are more in keeping with the language used to describe euthanasia or "good death," for the disabled. Hans is again able to project his own villainy onto Elsa implying that she is making those around her uncomfortable and therefore she is the one who doesn't belong. PWDs are, unfortunately, all too familiar with these accusations of being monstrous, making others afraid, and not belonging. By making Hans the scapegoat for all of the negative rhetoric surrounding PWDs, the Disney team allow for both Elsa and the townspeople who initially rejected her to experience redemption at the movie's end. Disney's move to make the villain male, and therefore representative of an oppressive patriarchal culture is an interesting one. In the past, the majority of Disney's villains have been middle-aged women, meant to represent the horror of a woman who embodies sexual desire well after her child-bearing years have ended (Putnam). Women and children make up the majority of the audience in Disney's princess films, so laying the blame on powerful, white men potentially frees female viewers from blame and invites them to side with Elsa and therefore take the moral high ground.
Elsa's narrative offers viewers a realistic and ethical critique of the way PWDs are treated in modern society, as I have attempted to demonstrate. Of course, that depiction is meaningless if viewers ultimately fail to decode Elsa's story as a disability-centric one. Fortunately, there is abundant evidence that audience members, from parents of children with physical disabilities, to teens living with mental disability, to adults with autism, recognize and applaud Disney's efforts to bring disability to the big screen. There are dozens of articles and blogs relating Elsa to disability, both on sites that focus on disability like The Mighty and Autism Speaks and also parenting and feminist blogs. The majority of those I found are overwhelmingly positive since the writers not only identify with Elsa's disabled experience but also find empowerment in the words she uses to stand up for herself during the song "Let It Go." Commenters see Elsa as representing a range of conditions from autism to serious physical disability. This is potentially  advantageous since the disabled community has struggled in the past to reconcile its myriad differences into a united disability culture with the potential to advocate on its own behalf (Peters, Shakespeare). In a blog titled The Third Glance , a Ph.D. student with autism outlines the way key scenes in Frozen , such as Elsa's disturbing meeting with the trolls and her subsequent imprisonment in her room, immediately map on to issues of diagnosis and passing familiar to viewers with autism. The author explains:
We are forced to conform…to suppress our autistic traits, to hide them from everyone. And when we fail, as we often do, because autism is an integral part of who we are, we are hidden from view instead…We don't have the opportunity to learn and grow with our powers, we are told to suppress them or there will be dire consequences. (para. 7)
The author of The Third Glance demonstrates one of the potential benefits of encoding disability as a power when they align it with the unique abilities of people with autism. Rather than seeing stemming, or intense focused interest in a specific subject as a limitation, Elsa empowers autistic audience members to tell their neurotypical peers to "let it go," and to let them be who they are. In a similar move, Autumn Aurelia writes in The Mighty about "9 Reasons Elsa's Storyline in Frozen is the Perfect Metaphor for Mental Illness," arguing that the "conceal don't feel" rhetoric Elsa's parents use is easily relatable to the struggle people with depression go through to hide their condition. Sakki Selznick discusses taking a teenaged boy with serious disabilities to the film and feeling grateful that he "saw himself in Elsa" in her blog She Writes (para. 8). Emily Urquhart, whose daughter has albinism writes about the way children now identify her daughter and her condition with Elsa in an article for BBC. Although she worries what will happen when Elsa is eventually dethroned, she does point out that Elsa is objectively the most positive filmic representative of the condition to date. Even Target seems to be getting in on the act; David Kiefaber points out in Creativity that Target's 2015 Halloween advertisement, which featured a young girl with arm crutches dressed as Elsa for Halloween, has caused parents to write in and praise the company for its representation of children like their own.
Elsa's overwhelmingly positive reception by members of the disability community as well as able-bodied children, parents, feminists, and other social rights activists indicates that Disney's counter-hegemonic disability narrative has hit its mark. Their immediate move to create a short film featuring the sisters together on screen as well as both a floor show and a new ride at Walt Disney World's Epcot, and now a guaranteed sequel, indicate that by and large Elsa and the social justice rhetoric she represents are here to stay. Disability scholars, beginning with Garland-Thomson, have argued that "representation informs the identity-and often the fate-of real people with extraordinary bodies" (15). Mary-Catherine Harrison builds on this argument claiming that "empathy for fictional characters can prompt ethical behavior in the extra-fictional world" (257). Elsa's overwhelming popularity as a Disney princess in combination with her realistic, ethical depiction of disability means that her character, and Frozen 's subsequent Disney brand, have the potential to change how normate viewers understand disability moving it from the realm of limitation and stigma to a position as fully realized identity deserving of equal treatment. Furthermore, since Elsa has been identified by disabled viewers alternatively as having mental, intellectual, cognitive, and physical difference, her character offers PWDs a representation of disability as a range of embodied positions that can be united to fight against prejudice and social inequality. As disability scholars have argued, there has yet to be a firmly established disability culture due in part to the wide variety of conditions that fall under this broad umbrella and partly due to a reluctance among the population to identify as disabled (Peters, Shakespeare, Davis). Unfortunately, without unity, widespread activism is difficult to achieve. Social Media provides a unique opportunity for PWDs to identify as such and come together in a relatively safe space, free from stigma and issues of accessibility. Ideally, as viewers with disabilities gather online to share their love of a popular film in articles, blogs, and their comments sections, they will also share their stories about discrimination and acceptance, and in doing so will band together to work for social change on a global scale.
Frozen 's Elsa has without a doubt created a stir both in theaters and online with her catchy theme song and striking social rhetoric. However, it is her position as a Disney princess that ensures both her current and future visibility. Disney princesses may grow old, but they never fade away. If there was any doubt, one need only take a stroll through a Disney theme park, or a local Walmart store, to see each princess's image, from Snow White to Merida, replicated in dozens of products from dresses and dolls to Blu-ray movies including straight-to-video sequels. Elsa's status as a Disney princess is necessary to her current and continued success; however, since she does not embark on a traditional princess journey, her story alone is not enough to signal her as belonging. In order to make her recognizable as a Disney princess, she has to have the look of a Disney princess, a design choice that is somewhat problematic from a disability activism standpoint since it involves erasing all physical traces of difference.
The Walt Disney Corporation may not have invented the modern concept of "cute" 12 ; however, they have built an empire out of it. 13 Tom Bancroft, who worked for Disney Studios as a supervising animator for twelve years, elaborates on the Disney aesthetic as it is taught today. According to Bancroft, the guiding principles to creating a cutely proportioned character are a large head and a small body because "these are the proportions of small children" (67). Next the face must have "expressive eyes with large pupils, a small, pert nose, and a small mouth with thick lips" (68). In order to emphasize the princesses' femininity, Bancroft encourages animators to draw curves because they "create a feeling of grace and elegance that is so naturally evident in the female form" (70). In keeping with this model, the reimagined Elsa has impossibly large blue eyes in a pert, heart-shaped face, framed by long, wavy white-blonde hair. When she sings, viewers can focus on her large, pouty lips, and when she dances her swerving hips and torso are all tilts and curves. Whatever objections parents and scholars raise due to Elsa's reinforcement of a limited model of femininity tend to be drowned out by the rousing success of her film and her brand.
Elsa's character design is important because it reinforces her status as a princess, and therefore as a figure worthy of audience identification. The connection between character appeal and audience empathy that Disney strives for stems from the belief that we tend to empathize more readily with those who are similar to us than those who are different. Martin Hoffman identifies this as "'similarity bias,' or our unwillingness or inability to empathize with people who are not like ourselves" (qtd. in Harrison 258). Francis de Waal supports this, stating, "We find it easier to identify with those like us - with the same cultural background, ethnic features, age, gender, job, and so on" (80). When we encounter someone who is not like us, for example someone with a physical or intellectual disability, we tend to experience what Quayson has termed "aesthetic nervousness." When this occurs, a person's ability to empathize with another human being is "short-circuited" by feelings of fear, pity, awe, or disgust (15). In order to engender empathy, Disney's heroes and heroines are drawn with the proportions discussed above in order to ensure that they are physically attractive, whereas their villains often display some form of physical difference in addition to being aligned with animals such as dragons or snakes rather than with other people.
When Elsa was originally designed, animators intended her to be the villain of her film and as such her aesthetic design reflected Disney's own brand of Otherness. Whereas Disney's princesses are built on curves to reflect their femininity, their villainesses are normally built using squares and triangles in order to make them appear more masculine. Amanda Putnam argues that Disney's leading ladies of villainy including Lady Tremaine and her daughters from Cinderella and Ursula from The Little Mermaid are drawn in a masculine style in order to visually represent their gender transgressions (demanding power and respect is just not ladylike, at least not in the early Disney movies). Putnam argues that while Disney's princesses wear form-fitting gowns that expose their cleavage in order to express their (heterosexual) desire, villainesses are "subtly masculine-their faces, body shape, and behavior lend 'mannish' traits to their characters" (151). For example, Lady Tremaine's face is "sharp-edged, with large eyes and a pointy chin, a clear divergence from Cinderella's softened cheeks, nose, and lips" (153). Furthermore, Putnam notes that Tremain's face actually changes colors "from gray and tan to dark green depending on her mood and actions," a move which further dehumanizes her (154). Elsa's original character design fits the mold that Putnam lays out quite clearly. She was meant to have cropped black hair, blue skin, and a "coat of living weasels" (Acuna para. 7). Like her predecessors, her face and body would have been sharply angled, and these characteristics in addition to her unnatural skin tone were meant to code her as evil and inhuman. Disney's choice to encode villainous attitudes using physical characteristics is obviously problematic from a disability studies standpoint since characteristics such as an unnatural skin tone or extreme thinness are often the result of long-term illness. There is a danger here that children will decode the message that illness is evil whereas a healthy body implies inherent goodness. Creating villains like Gaston or Hans, who are built on the same model as earlier Disney princes, helps to dispel this myth, but until Disney protagonists-including princesses-are able to embody realistic physical disability, the danger is ever-present.
Unlike either the Disney princesses or the villains that Putnam analyzes, Elsa's appearance actually changes mid-way through her film. When she comes out for her coronation, she is covered from head to foot in heavy clothing. She wears long gloves to hide her hands, and her hair is done up in a tight bun. When she reaches the mountain peak, however, she transforms from looking like an eighty-year-old spinster to being both young and sexy-characteristics we've come to expect from a Disney princess. During her song, "Let It Go," she literally lets her hair down and dons a sheer dress made of frost with a slit up one side and a pair of high heels reminiscent of Cinderella's glass slippers. If we look at Elsa's transformation from a disability studies perspective, in which women with physical disabilities are frequently rendered invisible, Elsa's newfound desirability is refreshing. It is doubly so since there is no "prince" in the picture for whom she is dressing up. Instead, Elsa's desirability is being emphasized for the audience with whom the creators hope to create an empathic bond. It is not surprising, then, that the entire sequence is visibly stunning since audience members need to view not just her body, but what she can do with her body, as beautiful. After all, our ability to empathize with characters like Elsa is tied up in our ability to see the character as "like us," or in this case, a more spectacular version of us to which we can aspire.
Thus far, we have seen how the powers that be at Disney use a pattern of rhetorical devices including their familiar princess genre, the encoding of disability as fantastical power, and the aesthetic of cuteness in order to persuade viewers to empathize with the company's first disabled princess. However, empathizing, while important, is not enough. In order for PWDs to enjoy the same rights as normate citizens, the majority of the population must embrace disability as a part of their own identities. When Lasseter realized that Elsa's condition was not unlike his son's, he stopped trying to villainize her difference, and instead encouraged his staff to embrace it. Similarly, if audience members can be convinced to relate to Elsa and her experience as like their own, they are more likely to advocate for persons with disability in their schools and workplaces. Here, again, the aesthetic of cuteness comes into play-quite literally. Lori Merish argues that cuteness creates a fundamental maternal desire because consumers identify the cute as not only part of their families, but also as a part of themselves; in order for this connection to occur, the person must see the cute object as like the self, but also recognize that the self is like the cute object (187). This transference of identity is most clearly seen when children play with toys, specifically dolls.
As they eat, sleep, live, and play in a Frozen world, children internalize the rhetoric of Disney's most recent princesses. Karen E. Wohlwend describes an ethnographic study of how 21 girls in a kindergarten classroom interact with their Disney Princess dolls in play and later in classroom writing exercises. Wohlwend notes, "Children reenact film scripts and expectations for each princess character, quoting memorized dialog or singing songs from the films as they talk in-character while playing with dolls or while using princess accessories" (58). As Disney's Frozen line outsells the combined princess brand, we can assume that more children are playing with Anna-and especially Elsa-dolls than any other princess figure (Fritz). When children play with these dolls, they internalize Elsa's storyline, and (albeit momentarily) become Elsa. This means that able-bodied, as well as disabled, children are imagining themselves into the disabled space and recognizing disability as a part of a shared identity. Through its cuteness and desirability, Elsa's doll line is able to make disability itself desirable. Furthermore, children are able to rehearse the social rhetoric that Disney subtly plants in the film as they re-enact the story over and over. When they play, children re-enact what Wohlberg terms the dolls' " anticipated identities : identifies that have been projected for consumers and that are sedimented by manufacturers' design practices and distribution processes" (59). However, they also push against those identities and create new scenarios in which their princess dolls are (at least somewhat) more empowered. In this way, children can reimagine spaces for Elsa where she no longer needs rescuing or to apologize for who she is, but rather she can be accepted and loved from the outset. This proactive play has the potential to prime children for social activism on behalf of Elsa and the real PWDs that she represents.
When children imagine themselves into Elsa's role as a disabled princess, they are taking on the disabled identity for themselves. In doing so, they are taking the first step towards acceptance of disability as a universal experience, a position that every one of us will occupy at one point or another if we live long enough. This attitude is in keeping with what Lennard Davis terms "dismodernism." Davis argues that whereas most social justice theories including feminism, gender studies, critical race theory, and queer theory seek to advocate for specific groups by focusing on their differences, "the dismodern era ushers in the concept that difference is what all of us have in common" (Davis 26). Whereas Shakespeare argues that "the goal of disability politics should be to make impairment and disability irrelevant wherever possible" (110), for Davis, it is disability's inclusivity that makes it the ideal identity since it emphasizes our similarities and works towards a cosmopolitan world view. Ideally, when people come together under the realization that disability is the one identity all of us will experience at one time or another, they will become more invested in the welfare of their fellow man and will work to ensure that everyone has access to education, the workforce, healthcare, and other fundamental institutions.
Throughout this paper, I have focused on the benefits of Disney's branding of disabled identity; however, I would be remiss if I did not point out the very real dangers that this marketing move creates. Characters like Elsa, whose disabilities are encoded as fantasy, work to make the normate viewer comfortable so that a serious conversation about the way PWDs are treated in our society can begin. However, Elsa has little in common with the real people with actual impairments that she represents beyond the abusive treatment she receives. Disney's representation of disability in Frozen , which aligns with the social model in viewing disability as the result of discrimination alone, is limited. As Shakespeare argues, "disabled people are experiencing both the intrinsic limitation of impairment," something that able-bodied people know comparatively little about, as well as the "externally imposed social discrimination" that likewise maps on to experiences with sexism, racism, and homophobia (31). As such, there is always a risk that when normate viewers are exposed to the reality, they will balk at acceptance and return to their former belief that PWDs are misfortunate or monstrous rather than like themselves. In addition to eliding the physical and intellectual difficulties that can arise from impairment, and therefore creating unrealistic expectations for PWDs to live up to, the cute aesthetic risks turning the feeling subject with disability into an unfeeling object for public consumption. As Merish argues, "Cuteness entails the fundamental ambivalence of the child in a liberal-capitalist order: at once as consenting 'subject' and property 'object." (187). Similarly, by marketing Elsa through doll, clothing, and other merchandise lines, Disney encourages consumers to think of her-and by extension real PWDs-as consumable objects incapable of feeling anything but gratitude towards the patron who generously receives them.
Despite its limitations, Disney's Frozen has the potential to open up a dialog about the way we perceive disability. Over the past 75 years, the studio's influence has spread worldwide.  Few animated characters are better known or loved than the Disney princess. By placing Elsa in the role of princess, and later queen, Disney is drawing on the cultural capital they have built up through a long line of princess movies. Children play with the princesses' dolls, dress in their clothes, sing their songs, and in effect become Disney princesses themselves. The identity of the Disney princess is a universal one, and by making the princess disabled, Disney is able to universalize that identity as well. I do believe we should be cautious about supporting an over-expansion of the definition of disability. This is due in part to the fact that disability remains a relative new-comer to identity politics, and the people represented have been colonized by the able-bodied community in the past. In addition, disability, unlike sex, gender, race, or sexual orientation, has real physical and intellectual consequences that make it unlike other socially constructed identities 14 . Despite these limitations, I believe we can read Disney's move to represent disability as universal as an extension of disability activists' own motto, "We'll all be disabled if we live long enough," which is frequently uttered in order to create awareness and political action on behalf of PWDs by emphasizing disability as a shared experience. As Davis has pointed out, PWDs have rapidly been losing ground in the work world due to the overturning of the ADA in 95% of recent Supreme Court cases. If people do not start rethinking their own positions in relation to disability, and therefore responding with empathy instead of sympathy, or worse prejudicial judgement, this situation is only going to worsen. Giroux and Pollock argue that Disney infiltrates every aspect of children's-and many adults'-lives, from what we watch, what we wear, and what we buy, to how our children are educated and even the social behaviors they learn to enact, so if their choice to advocate for disability by making it "adorable," and yes, desirable has the potential to change lives for the better, then I say by all means we should "let it go."
The year 1866 was signalised by a remarkable incident, a mysterious and puzzling phenomenon, which doubtless no one has yet forgotten. Not to mention rumours which agitated the maritime population and excited the public mind, even in the interior of continents, seafaring men were particularly excited. Merchants, common sailors, captains of vessels, skippers, both of Europe and America, naval officers of all countries, and the Governments of several states on the two continents, were deeply interested in the matter.
For some time past, vessels had been met by "an enormous thing," a long object, spindle-shaped, occasionally phosphorescent, and infinitely larger and more rapid in its movements than a whale. The facts relating to this apparition (entered in various log-books) agreed in most respects as to the shape of the object or creature in question, the untiring rapidity of its movements, its surprising power of locomotion, and the peculiar life with which it seemed endowed. If it was a cetacean, it surpassed in size all those hitherto classified in science. Taking into consideration the mean of observations made at divers times,-rejecting the timid estimate of those who assigned to this object a length of two hundred feet, equally with the exaggerated opinions which set it down as a mile in width and three in length,-we might fairly conclude that this mysterious being surpassed greatly all dimensions admitted by the ichthyologists of the day, if it existed at all. And that it _did_ exist was an undeniable fact; and, with that tendency which disposes the human mind in favour of the marvellous, we can understand the excitement produced in the entire world by this supernatural apparition. As to classing it in the list of fables, the idea was out of the question.
On the 20th of July, 1866, the steamer _Governor Higginson_, of the Calcutta and Burnach Steam Navigation Company, had met this moving mass five miles off the east coast of Australia. Captain Baker thought at first that he was in the presence of an unknown sandbank; he even prepared to determine its exact position, when two columns of water, projected by the inexplicable object, shot with a hissing noise a hundred and fifty feet up into the air. Now, unless the sandbank had been submitted to the intermittent eruption of a geyser, the _Governor Higginson_ had to do neither more nor less than with an aquatic mammal, unknown till then, which threw up from its blow-holes columns of water mixed with air and vapour.
Similar facts were observed on the 23rd of July in the same year, in the Pacific Ocean, by the _Columbus_, of the West India and Pacific Steam Navigation Company. But this extraordinary cetaceous creature could transport itself from one place to another with surprising velocity; as, in an interval of three days, the _Governor Higginson_ and the _Columbus_ had observed it at two different points of the chart, separated by a distance of more than seven hundred nautical leagues.
Fifteen days later, two thousand miles farther off, the _Helvetia_, of the Compagnie-Nationale, and the _Shannon_, of the Royal Mail Steamship Company, sailing to windward in that portion of the Atlantic lying between the United States and Europe, respectively signalled the monster to each other in 42° 15′ N. lat. and 60° 35′ W. long. In these simultaneous observations they thought themselves justified in estimating the minimum length of the mammal at more than three hundred and fifty feet, as the _Shannon_ and _Helvetia_ were of smaller dimensions than it, though they measured three hundred feet over all. Now the largest whales, those which frequent those parts of the sea round the Aleutian, Kulammak, and Umgullich islands, have never exceeded the length of sixty yards, if they attain that. These reports arriving one after the other, with fresh observations made on board the transatlantic ship _Pereire_, a collision which occurred between the _Etna_ of the Inman line and the monster, a _procès verbal_ directed by the officers of the French frigate _Normandie_, a very accurate survey made by the staff of Commodore Fitz-James on board the _Lord Clyde_, greatly influenced public opinion. Light-thinking people jested upon the phenomenon, but grave practical countries, such as England, America, and Germany, treated the matter more seriously.
In every place of great resort the monster was the fashion. They sang of it in the cafés, ridiculed it in the papers, and represented it on the stage. All kinds of stories were circulated regarding it. There appeared in the papers caricatures of every gigantic and imaginary creature, from the white whale, the terrible "Moby Dick" of hyperborean regions, to the immense kraken whose tentacles could entangle a ship of five hundred tons, and hurry it into the abyss of the ocean. The legends of ancient times were even resuscitated, and the opinions of Aristotle and Pliny revived, who admitted the existence of these monsters, as well as the Norwegian tales of Bishop Pontoppidan, the accounts of Paul Heggede, and, last of all, the reports of Mr. Harrington (whose good faith no one could suspect), who affirmed that, being on board the _Castillan_, in 1857, he had seen this enormous serpent, which had never until that time frequented any other seas but those of the ancient "_Constitutionnel_."
Then burst forth the interminable controversy between the credulous and the incredulous in the societies of savants and the scientific journals. "The question of the monster" inflamed all minds. Editors of scientific journals, quarrelling with believers in the supernatural, spilled seas of ink during this memorable campaign, some even drawing blood; for, from the sea-serpent they came to direct personalities. For six months war was waged with various fortune in the leading articles of the Geographical Institution of Brazil, the Royal Academy of Science of Berlin, the British Association, the Smithsonian Institution of Washington, in the discussions of the "Indian Archipelago," of the Cosmos of the Abbé Moigno, in the Mittheilungen of Petermann, in the scientific chronicles of the great journals of France and other countries. The cheaper journals replied keenly and with inexhaustible zest. These satirical writers parodied a remark of Linnæus, quoted by the adversaries of the monster, maintaining "that nature did not make fools," and adjured their contemporaries not to give the lie to nature, by admitting the existence of krakens, sea-serpents, "Moby Dicks," and other lucubrations of delirious sailors. At length an article in a well-known satirical journal by a favourite contributor, the chief of the staff, settled the monster, like Hippolytus, giving it the death-blow amidst an universal burst of laughter. Wit had conquered science.
During the first months of the year 1867 the question seemed buried, never to revive, when new facts were brought before the public. It was then no longer a scientific problem to be solved, but a real danger seriously to be avoided. The question took quite another shape. The monster became a small island, a rock, a reef, but a reef of indefinite and shifting proportions.
On the 5th of March, 1867, the _Moravian_, of the Montreal Ocean Company, finding herself during the night in 27° 30′ lat. and 72° 15′ long., struck on her starboard quarter a rock, marked in no chart for that part of the sea. Under the combined efforts of the wind and its four hundred horse-power, it was going at the rate of thirteen knots. Had it not been for the superior strength of the hull of the _Moravian_, she would have been broken by the shock and gone down with the 237 passengers she was bringing home from Canada. The accident happened about five o'clock in the morning, as the day was breaking. The officers of the quarter-deck hurried to the after-part of the vessel. They examined the sea with the most scrupulous attention. They saw nothing but a strong eddy about three cables' length distant, as if the surface had been violently agitated. The bearings of the place were taken exactly, and the _Moravian_ continued its route without apparent damage. Had it struck on a submerged rock, or on an enormous wreck? they could not tell; but on examination of the ship's bottom when undergoing repairs, it was found that part of her keel was broken.
This fact, so grave in itself, might perhaps have been forgotten like many others if, three weeks after, it had not been re-enacted under similar circumstances. But, thanks to the nationality of the victim of the shock, thanks to the reputation of the company to which the vessel belonged, the circumstance became extensively circulated. The 13th of April, 1867, the sea being beautiful, the breeze favourable, the _Scotia_, of the Cunard Company's line, found herself in 15° 12′ long. and 45° 37′ lat. She was going at the speed of thirteen knots and a half.
At seventeen minutes past four in the afternoon, whilst the passengers were assembled at lunch in the great saloon, a slight shock was felt on the hull of the _Scotia_, on her quarter, a little aft of the port-paddle.
The _Scotia_ had not struck, but she had been struck, and seemingly by something rather sharp and penetrating than blunt. The shock had been so slight that no one had been alarmed, had it not been for the shouts of the carpenter's watch, who rushed on to the bridge, exclaiming, "We are sinking! we are sinking!" At first the passengers were much frightened, but Captain Anderson hastened to reassure them. The danger could not be imminent. The _Scotia_, divided into seven compartments by strong partitions, could brave with impunity any leak. Captain Anderson went down immediately into the hold. He found that the sea was pouring into the fifth compartment; and the rapidity of the influx proved that the force of the water was considerable. Fortunately this compartment did not hold the boilers, or the fires would have been immediately extinguished. Captain Anderson ordered the engines to be stopped at once, and one of the men went down to ascertain the extent of the injury. Some minutes afterwards they discovered the existence of a large hole, of two yards in diameter, in the ship's bottom. Such a leak could not be stopped; and the _Scotia_, her paddles half submerged, was obliged to continue her course. She was then three hundred miles from Cape Clear, and after three days' delay, which caused great uneasiness in Liverpool, she entered the basin of the company. The engineers visited the _Scotia_, which was put in dry dock. They could scarcely believe it possible; at two yards and a half below water-mark was a regular rent, in the form of an isosceles triangle. The broken place in the iron plates was so perfectly defined that it could not have been more neatly done by a punch. It was clear, then, that the instrument producing the perforation was not of a common stamp; and after having been driven with prodigious strength, and piercing an iron plate 1-3/8 inches thick, had withdrawn itself by a retrograde motion truly inexplicable.
Such was the last fact, which resulted in exciting once more the torrent of public opinion. From this moment all unlucky casualties which could not be otherwise accounted for were put down to the monster. Upon this imaginary creature rested the responsibility of all these shipwrecks, which unfortunately were considerable; for of three thousand ships whose loss was annually recorded at Lloyd's, the number of sailing and steam ships supposed to be totally lost, from the absence of all news, amounted to not less than two hundred! Now, it was the "monster" who, justly or unjustly, was accused of their disappearance, and, thanks to it, communication between the different continents became more and more dangerous. The public demanded peremptorily that the seas should at any price be relieved from this formidable cetacean.
At the period when these events took place, I had just returned from a scientific research in the disagreeable territory of Nebraska, in the United States. In virtue of my office as Assistant Professor in the Museum of Natural History in Paris, the French Government had attached me to that expedition. After six months in Nebraska, I arrived in New York towards the end of March, laden with a precious collection. My departure for France was fixed for the first days in May. Meanwhile, I was occupying myself in classifying my mineralogical, botanical, and zoological riches, when the accident happened to the _Scotia_. I was perfectly up in the subject which was the question of the day. How could I be otherwise? I had read and re-read all the American and European papers without being any nearer a conclusion. This mystery puzzled me. Under the impossibility of forming an opinion, I jumped from one extreme to the other. That there really was something could not be doubted, and the incredulous were invited to put their finger on the wound of the _Scotia_.
On my arrival at New York the question was at its height. The hypothesis of the floating island, and the unapproachable sandbank, supported by minds little competent to form a judgment, was abandoned. And, indeed, unless this shoal had a machine in its stomach, how could it change its position with such astonishing rapidity? From the same cause, the idea of a floating hull of an enormous wreck was given up.
There remained then only two possible solutions of the question, which created two distinct parties: on one side, those who were for a monster of colossal strength; on the other, those who were for a submarine vessel of enormous motive power.
But this last hypothesis, plausible as it was, could not stand against inquiries made in both worlds. That a private gentleman should have such a machine at his command was not likely. Where, when, and how was it built? and how could its construction have been kept secret? Certainly a Government might possess such a destructive machine. And in these disastrous times, when the ingenuity of man has multiplied the power of weapons of war, it was possible that, without the knowledge of others, a state might try to work such a formidable engine. After the chassepots came the torpedoes, after the torpedoes the submarine rams, then-the reaction. At least, I hope so.
But the hypothesis of a war machine fell before the declaration of Governments. As public interest was in question, and transatlantic communications suffered, their veracity could not be doubted. But, how admit that the construction of this submarine boat had escaped the public eye? For a private gentleman to keep the secret under such circumstances would be very difficult, and for a state whose every act is persistently watched by powerful rivals, certainly impossible. After inquiries made in England, France, Russia, Prussia, Spain, Italy, and America, even in Turkey, the hypothesis of a submarine monitor was definitely rejected.
Upon my arrival in New York several persons did me the honour of consulting me on the phenomenon in question. I had published in France a work in quarto, in two volumes, entitled "Mysteries of the Great Submarine Grounds." This book, highly approved of in the learned world, gained for me a special reputation in this rather obscure branch of Natural History. My advice was asked. As long as I could deny the reality of the fact, I confined myself to a decided negative. But soon, finding myself driven into a corner, I was obliged to explain myself categorically. And even "the Honourable Pierre Aronnax, Professor in the Museum of Paris," was called upon by the _New York Herald_ to express a definite opinion of some sort. I did something. I spoke, for want of power to hold my tongue. I discussed the question in all its forms, politically and scientifically; and I give here an extract from a carefully-studied article which I published in the number of the 30th of April. It ran as follows:-
"After examining one by one the different hypotheses, rejecting all other suggestions, it becomes necessary to admit the existence of a marine animal of enormous power.
"The great depths of the ocean are entirely unknown to us. Soundings cannot reach them. What passes in those remote depths-what beings live, or can live, twelve or fifteen miles beneath the surface of the waters-what is the organisation of these animals, we can scarcely conjecture. However, the solution of the problem submitted to me may modify the form of the dilemma. Either we do know all the varieties of beings which people our planet, or we do not. If we do _not_ know them all-if Nature has still secrets in ichthyology for us, nothing is more conformable to reason than to admit the existence of fishes, or cetaceans of other kinds, or even of new species, of an organisation formed to inhabit the strata inaccessible to soundings, and which an accident of some sort, either fatastical or capricious, has brought at long intervals to the upper level of the ocean.
"If, on the contrary, we _do_ know all living kinds, we must necessarily seek for the animal in question amongst those marine beings already classed; and, in that case, I should be disposed to admit the existence of a gigantic narwhal.
"The common narwhal, or unicorn of the sea, often attains a length of sixty feet. Increase its size fivefold or tenfold, give it strength proportionate to its size, lengthen its destructive weapons, and you obtain the animal required. It will have the proportions determined by the officers of the _Shannon_, the instrument required by the perforation of the _Scotia_, and the power necessary to pierce the hull of the steamer.
"Indeed, the narwhal is armed with a sort of ivory sword, a halberd, according to the expression of certain naturalists. The principal tusk has the hardness of steel. Some of these tusks have been found buried in the bodies of whales, which the unicorn always attacks with success. Others have been drawn out, not without trouble, from the bottoms of ships, which they had pierced through and through, as a gimlet pierces a barrel. The Museum of the Faculty of Medicine of Paris possesses one of these defensive weapons, two yards and a quarter in length, and fifteen inches in diameter at the base.
"Very well! suppose this weapon to be six times stronger and the animal ten times more powerful; launch it at the rate of twenty miles an hour, and you obtain a shock capable of producing the catastrophe required. Until further information, therefore, I shall maintain it to be a sea-unicorn of colossal dimensions, armed not with a halberd, but with a real spur, as the armoured frigates, or the 'rams' of war, whose massiveness and motive power it would possess at the same time. Thus may this puzzling phenomenon be explained, unless there be something over and above all that one has ever conjectured, seen, perceived, or experienced; which is just within the bounds of possibility." These last words were cowardly on my part; but, up to a certain point, I wished to shelter my dignity as Professor, and not give too much cause for laughter to the Americans, who laugh well when they do laugh. I reserved for myself a way of escape. In effect, however, I admitted the existence of the "monster." My article was warmly discussed, which procured it a high reputation. It rallied round it a certain number of partisans. The solution it proposed gave, at least, full liberty to the imagination. The human mind delights in grand conceptions of supernatural beings. And the sea is precisely their best vehicle, the only medium through which these giants (against which terrestrial animals, such as elephants or rhinoceroses, are as nothing) can be produced or developed.
The industrial and commercial papers treated the question chiefly from this point of view. The _Shipping and Mercantile Gazette_, the _Lloyd's List_, the _Packet-Boat_, and the _Maritime and Colonial Review_, all papers devoted to insurance companies which threatened to raise their rates of premium, were unanimous on this point. Public opinion had been pronounced. The United States were the first in the field; and in New York they made preparations for an expedition destined to pursue this narwhal. A frigate of great speed, the _Abraham Lincoln_, was put in commission as soon as possible. The arsenals were opened to Commander Farragut, who hastened the arming of his frigate; but, as it always happens, the moment it was decided to pursue the monster, the monster did not appear. For two months no one heard it spoken of. No ship met with it. It seemed as if this unicorn knew of the plots weaving around it. It had been so much talked of, even through the Atlantic cable, that jesters pretended that this slender fly had stopped a telegram on its passage and was making the most of it.
So when the frigate had been armed for a long campaign, and provided with formidable fishing apparatus, no one could tell what course to pursue. Impatience grew apace, when, on the 2nd of July, they learned that a steamer of the line of San Francisco, from California to Shanghai, had seen the animal three weeks before in the North Pacific Ocean. The excitement caused by this news was extreme. The ship was revictualled and well stocked with coal.
Three hours before the _Abraham Lincoln_ left Brooklyn pier, I received a letter worded as follows:-
"To M. ARONNAX, Professor in the Museum of Paris, Fifth Avenue Hotel,
New York.
"SIR,-If you will consent to join the _Abraham Lincoln_ in this expedition, the Government of the United States will with pleasure see France represented in the enterprise. Commander Farragut has a cabin at your disposal.
"Very cordially yours,
"J.B. HOBSON,
"Secretary of Marine."
Three seconds before the arrival of J. B. Hobson's letter, I no more thought of pursuing the unicorn than of attempting the passage of the North Sea. Three seconds after reading the letter of the honourable Secretary of Marine, I felt that my true vocation, the sole end of my life, was to chase this disturbing monster, and purge it from the world.
But I had just returned from a fatiguing journey, weary and longing for repose. I aspired to nothing more than again seeing my country, my friends, my little lodging by the Jardin des Plantes, my dear and precious collections. But nothing could keep me back! I forgot all-fatigue, friends and collections-and accepted without hesitation the offer of the American Government.
"Besides," thought I, "all roads lead back to Europe (for my particular benefit), and I will not hurry me towards the coast of France. This worthy animal may allow itself to be caught in the seas of Europe (for my particular benefit), and I will not bring back less than half a yard of his ivory halberd to the Museum of Natural History." But in the meanwhile I must seek this narwhal in the North Pacific Ocean, which, to return to France, was taking the road to the antipodes. "Conseil," I called in an impatient voice.
Conseil was my servant, a true, devoted Flemish boy, who had accompanied me in all my travels. I liked him, and he returned the liking well. He was phlegmatic by nature, regular from principle, zealous from habit, evincing little disturbance at the different surprises of life, very quick with his hands, and apt at any service required of him; and, despite his name, never giving advice-even when asked for it.
Conseil had followed me for the last ten years wherever science led. Never once did he complain of the length or fatigue of a journey, never make an objection to pack his portmanteau for whatever country it might be, or however far away, whether China or Congo. Besides all this, he had good health, which defied all sickness, and solid muscles, but no nerves; good morals are understood. This boy was thirty years old, and his age to that of his master as fifteen to twenty. May I be excused for saying that I was forty years old?
But Conseil had one fault: he was ceremonious to a degree, and would never speak to me but in the third person, which was sometimes provoking.
"Conseil," said I again, beginning with feverish hands to make preparations for my departure.
Certainly I was sure of this devoted boy. As a rule, I never asked him if it were convenient for him or not to follow me in my travels; but this time the expedition in question might be prolonged, and the enterprise might be hazardous in pursuit of an animal capable of sinking a frigate as easily as a nutshell. Here there was matter for reflection even to the most impassive man in the world. What would
Conseil say?
"Conseil," I called a third time.
Conseil appeared.
"Did you call, sir?" said he, entering.
"Yes, my boy; make preparations for me and yourself too. We leave in two hours."
"As you please, sir," replied Conseil, quietly.
"Not an instant to lose;-lock in my trunk all travelling utensils, coats, shirts, and stockings-without counting, as many as you can, and make haste."
"And your collections, sir?" observed Conseil.
"We will think of them by and by."
"What! the archiotherium, the hyracotherium, the oreodons, the cheropotamus, and the other skins?"
"They will keep them at the hotel."
"And your live Babiroussa, sir?"
"They will feed it during our absence; besides, I will give orders to forward our menagerie to France."
"We are not returning to Paris, then?" said Conseil. "Oh! certainly," I answered, evasively, "by making a curve." "Will the curve please you, sir?"
"Oh! it will be nothing; not quite so direct a road, that is all. We take our passage in the _Abraham Lincoln_."
"As you think proper, sir," coolly replied Conseil. "You see, my friend, it has to do with the monster-the famous narwhal. We are going to purge it from the seas. The author of a work in quarto in two volumes, on the 'Mysteries of the Great Submarine Grounds' cannot forbear embarking with Commander Farragut. A glorious mission, but a dangerous one! We cannot tell where we may go; these animals can be very capricious. But we will go whether or no; we have got a captain who is pretty wide-awake."
I opened a credit account for Babiroussa, and, Conseil following, I jumped into a cab. Our luggage was transported to the deck of the frigate immediately. I hastened on board and asked for Commander Farragut. One of the sailors conducted me to the poop, where I found myself in the presence of a good-looking officer, who held out his hand to me.
"Monsieur Pierre Aronnax?" said he.
"Himself," replied I; "Commander Farragut?"
"You are welcome, Professor; your cabin is ready for you." I bowed, and desired to be conducted to the cabin destined for me. The _Abraham Lincoln_ had been well chosen and equipped for her new destination. She was a frigate of great speed, fitted with high-pressure engines which admitted a pressure of seven atmospheres. Under this the _Abraham Lincoln_ attained the mean speed of nearly eighteen knots and a third an hour-a considerable speed, but, nevertheless, insufficient to grapple with this gigantic cetacean. The interior arrangements of the frigate corresponded to its nautical qualities. I was well satisfied with my cabin, which was in the after part, opening upon the gunroom.
"We shall be well off here," said I to Conseil.
"As well, by your honour's leave, as a hermit-crab in the shell of a whelk," said Conseil.
I left Conseil to stow our trunks conveniently away, and remounted the poop in order to survey the preparations for departure. At that moment Commander Farragut was ordering the last moorings to be cast loose which held the _Abraham Lincoln_ to the pier of Brooklyn. So in a quarter of an hour, perhaps less, the frigate would have sailed without me. I should have missed this extraordinary, supernatural, and incredible expedition, the recital of which may well meet with some scepticism.
But Commander Farragut would not lose a day nor an hour in scouring the seas in which the animal had been sighted. He sent for the engineer. "Is the steam full on?" asked he.
"Yes, sir," replied the engineer.
"Go ahead," cried Commander Farragut.
The quay of Brooklyn, and all that part of New York bordering on the East River, was crowded with spectators. Three cheers burst successively from five hundred thousand throats; thousands of handkerchiefs were waved above the heads of the compact mass, saluting the _Abraham Lincoln_, until she reached the waters of the Hudson, at the point of that elongated peninsula which forms the town of New York. Then the frigate, following the coast of New Jersey along the right bank of the beautiful river, covered with villas, passed between the forts, which saluted her with their heaviest guns. The _Abraham Lincoln_ answered by hoisting the American colours three times, whose thirty-nine stars shone resplendent from the mizzen-peak; then modifying its speed to take the narrow channel marked by buoys placed in the inner bay formed by Sandy Hook Point, it coasted the long sandy beach, where some thousands of spectators gave it one final cheer. The escort of boats and tenders still followed the frigate, and did not leave her until they came abreast of the lightship, whose two lights marked the entrance of New York Channel.
Six bells struck, the pilot got into his boat, and rejoined the little schooner which was waiting under our lee, the fires were made up, the screw beat the waves more rapidly, the frigate skirted the low yellow coast of Long Island; and at eight bells, after having lost sight in the north-west of the lights of Fire Island, she ran at full steam on to the dark waters of the Atlantic.
Captain Farragut was a good seaman, worthy of the frigate he commanded. His vessel and he were one. He was the soul of it. On the question of the cetacean there was no doubt in his mind, and he would not allow the existence of the animal to be disputed on board. He believed in it, as certain good women believe in the leviathan-by faith, not by reason. The monster did exist, and he had sworn to rid the seas of it. He was a kind of Knight of Rhodes, a second Dieudonné de Gozon, going to meet the serpent which desolated the island. Either Captain Farragut would kill the narwhal, or the narwhal would kill the captain. There was no third course.
The officers on board shared the opinion of their chief. They were ever chatting, discussing, and calculating the various chances of a meeting, watching narrowly the vast surface of the ocean. More than one took up his quarters voluntarily in the cross-trees, who would have cursed such a berth under any other circumstances. As long as the sun described its daily course, the rigging was crowded with sailors, whose feet were burnt to such an extent by the heat of the deck as to render it unbearable; still the _Abraham Lincoln_ had not yet breasted the suspected waters of the Pacific. As to the ship's company, they desired nothing better than to meet the unicorn, to harpoon it, hoist it on board, and despatch it. They watched the sea with eager attention. Besides, Captain Farragut had spoken of a certain sum of two thousand dollars, set apart for whoever should first sight the monster, were he cabin-boy, common seaman, or officer.
I leave you to judge how eyes were used on board the _Abraham Lincoln_. For my own part I was not behind the others, and left to no one my share of daily observations. The frigate might have been called the _Argus_, for a hundred reasons. Only one amongst us, Conseil, seemed to protest by his indifference against the question which so interested us all, and seemed to be out of keeping with the general enthusiasm on board.
I have said that Captain Farragut had carefully provided his ship with every apparatus for catching the gigantic cetacean. No whaler had ever been better armed. We possessed every known engine, from the harpoon thrown by the hand to the barbed arrows of the blunderbuss, and the explosive balls of the duck-gun. On the forecastle lay the perfection of a breech-loading gun, very thick at the breech, and very narrow in the bore, the model of which had been in the Exhibition of 1867. This precious weapon of American origin could throw with ease a conical projectile of nine pounds to a mean distance of ten miles. Thus the _Abraham Lincoln_ wanted for no means of destruction; and, what was better still, she had on board Ned Land, the prince of harpooners.
Ned Land was a Canadian, with an uncommon quickness of hand, and who knew no equal in his dangerous occupation. Skill, coolness, audacity, and cunning he possessed in a superior degree, and it must be a cunning whale or a singularly "cute" cachalot to escape the stroke of his harpoon.
Ned Land was about forty years of age; he was a tall man (more than six feet high), strongly built, grave and taciturn, occasionally violent, and very passionate when contradicted. His person attracted attention, but above all the boldness of his look, which gave a singular expression to his face.
Who calls himself Canadian calls himself French; and, little communicative as Ned Land was, I must admit that he took a certain liking for me. My nationality drew him to me, no doubt. It was an opportunity for him to talk, and for me to hear, that old language of Rabelais, which is still in use in some Canadian provinces. The harpooner's family was originally from Quebec, and was already a tribe of hardy fishermen when this town belonged to France. Little by little, Ned Land acquired a taste for chatting, and I loved to hear the recital of his adventures in the polar seas. He related his fishing, and his combats, with natural poetry of expression; his recital took the form of an epic poem, and I seemed to be listening to a Canadian Homer singing the Iliad of the regions of the North. I am portraying this hardy companion as I really knew him. We are old friends now, united in that unchangeable friendship which is born and cemented amidst extreme dangers. Ah, brave Ned! I ask no more than to live a hundred years longer, that I may have more time to dwell the longer on your memory.
Now, what was Ned Land's opinion upon the question of the marine monster? I must admit that he did not believe in the unicorn, and was the only one on board who did not share that universal conviction. He even avoided the subject, which I one day thought it my duty to press upon him. One magnificent evening, the 30th of July-that is to say, three weeks after our departure-the frigate was abreast of Cape Blanc, thirty miles to leeward of the coast of Patagonia. We had crossed the tropic of Capricorn, and the Straits of Magellan opened less than seven hundred miles to the south. Before eight days were over the _Abraham Lincoln_ would be ploughing the waters of the Pacific. Seated on the poop, Ned Land and I were chatting of one thing and another as we looked at this mysterious sea, whose great depths had up to this time been inaccessible to the eye of man. I naturally led up the conversation to the giant unicorn, and examined the various chances of success or failure of the expedition. But, seeing that Ned Land let me speak without saying too much himself, I pressed him more closely. "Well, Ned," said I, "is it possible that you are not convinced of the existence of this cetacean that we are following? Have you any particular reason for being so incredulous?"
The harpooner looked at me fixedly for some moments before answering, struck his broad forehead with his hand (a habit of his), as if to collect himself, and said at last, "Perhaps I have, Mr. Aronnax." "But, Ned, you, a whaler by profession, familiarised with all the great marine mammalia-you, whose imagination might easily accept the hypothesis of enormous cetaceans, _you_ ought to be the last to doubt under such circumstances!"
"That is just what deceives you, Professor," replied Ned. "That the vulgar should believe in extraordinary comets traversing space, and in the existence of antediluvian monsters in the heart of the globe, may well be; but neither astronomer nor geologist believes in such chimeras. As a whaler I have followed many a cetacean, harpooned a great number, and killed several; but, however strong or well-armed they may have been, neither their tails nor their weapons would have been able even to scratch the iron plates of a steamer." "But, Ned, they tell of ships which the teeth of the narwhal have pierced through and through."
"Wooden ships-that is possible," replied the Canadian, "but I have never seen it done; and, until further proof, I deny that whales, cetaceans, or sea-unicorns could ever produce the effect you describe." "Well, Ned, I repeat it with a conviction resting on the logic of facts. I believe in the existence of a mammal power fully organised, belonging to the branch of vertebrata, like the whales, the cachalots, or the dolphins, and furnished with a horn of defence of great penetrating power."
"Hum!" said the harpooner, shaking his head with the air of a man who would not be convinced.
"Notice one thing, my worthy Canadian," I resumed. "If such an animal is in existence, if it inhabits the depths of the ocean, if it frequents the strata lying miles below the surface of the water, it must necessarily possess an organisation the strength of which would defy all comparison."
"And why this powerful organisation?" demanded Ned. "Because it requires incalculable strength to keep one's self in these strata and resist their pressure. Listen to me. Let us admit that the pressure of the atmosphere is represented by the weight of a column of water thirty-two feet high. In reality the column of water would be shorter, as we are speaking of sea water, the density of which is greater than that of fresh water. Very well, when you dive, Ned, as many times thirty-two feet of water as there are above you, so many times does your body bear a pressure equal to that of the atmosphere, that is to say, 15 lbs. for each square inch of its surface. It follows, then, that at 320 feet this pressure = that of 10 atmospheres, of 100 atmospheres at 3200 feet, and of 1000 atmospheres at 32,000 feet, that is, about 6 miles; which is equivalent to saying that if you could attain this depth in the ocean, each square three-eighths of an inch of the surface of your body would bear a pressure of 5600 lbs. Ah! my brave Ned, do you know how many square inches you carry on the surface of your body?"
"I have no idea, Mr. Aronnax."
"About 6500; and, as in reality the atmospheric pressure is about 15 lbs. to the square inch, your 6500 square inches bear at this moment a pressure of 97,500 lbs."
"Without my perceiving it?"
"Without your perceiving it. And if you are not crushed by such a pressure, it is because the air penetrates the interior of your body with equal pressure. Hence perfect equilibrium between the interior and exterior pressure, which thus neutralise each other, and which allows you to bear it without inconvenience. But in the water it is another thing."
"Yes, I understand," replied Ned, becoming more attentive; "because the water surrounds me, but does not penetrate."
"Precisely, Ned: so that at 32 feet beneath the surface of the sea you would undergo a pressure of 97,500 lbs.; at 320 feet, ten times that pressure; at 3200 feet, a hundred times that pressure; lastly, at 32,000 feet, a thousand times that pressure would be 97,500,000 lbs.-that is to say, that you would be flattened as if you had been drawn from the plates of a hydraulic machine!"
"The devil!" exclaimed Ned.
"Very well, my worthy harpooner, if some vertebrate, several hundred yards long, and large in proportion, can maintain itself in such depths-of those whose surface is represented by millions of square inches, that is by tens of millions of pounds, we must estimate the pressure they undergo. Consider, then, what must be the resistance of their bony structure, and the strength of their organisation to withstand such pressure!"
"Why!" exclaimed Ned Land, "they must be made of iron plates eight inches thick, like the armoured frigates."
"As you say, Ned. And think what destruction such a mass would cause, if hurled with the speed of an express train against the hull of a vessel."
"Yes-certainly-perhaps," replied the Canadian, shaken by these figures, but not yet willing to give in.
"Well, have I convinced you?"
"You have convinced me of one thing, sir, which is that, if such animals do exist at the bottom of the seas, they must necessarily be as strong as you say."
"But if they do not exist, mine obstinate harpooner, how explain the accident to the _Scotia?_"
The voyage of the _Abraham Lincoln_ was for a long time marked by no special incident. But one circumstance happened which showed the wonderful dexterity of Ned Land, and proved what confidence we might place in him.
The 30th of June, the frigate spoke some American whalers, from whom we learned that they knew nothing about the narwhal. But one of them, the captain of the _Monroe_, knowing that Ned Land had shipped on board the _Abraham Lincoln_, begged for his help in chasing a whale they had in sight. Commander Farragut, desirous of seeing Ned Land at work, gave him permission to go on board the _Monroe_. And fate served our Canadian so well that, instead of one whale, he harpooned two with a double blow, striking one straight to the heart, and catching the other after some minutes' pursuit.
Decidedly, if the monster ever had to do with Ned Land's harpoon, I
would not bet in its favour.
The frigate skirted the south-east coast of America with great rapidity. The 3rd of July we were at the opening of the Straits of Magellan, level with Cape Vierges. But Commander Farragut would not take a tortuous passage, but doubled Cape Horn.
The ship's crew agreed with him. And certainly it was possible that they might meet the narwhal in this narrow pass. Many of the sailors affirmed that the monster could not pass there, "that he was too big for that!"
The 6th of July, about three o'clock in the afternoon, the _Abraham Lincoln_, at fifteen miles to the south, doubled the solitary island, this lost rock at the extremity of the American continent, to which some Dutch sailors gave the name of their native town, Cape Horn. The course was taken towards the north-west, and the next day the screw of the frigate was at last beating the waters of the Pacific. "Keep your eyes open!" called out the sailors.
And they were opened widely. Both eyes and glasses, a little dazzled, it is true, by the prospect of two thousand dollars, had not an instant's repose. Day and night they watched the surface of the ocean, and even nyctalopes, whose faculty of seeing in the darkness multiplies their chances a hundredfold, would have had enough to do to gain the prize.
I myself, for whom money had no charms, was not the least attentive on board. Giving but few minutes to my meals, but a few hours to sleep, indifferent to either rain or sunshine, I did not leave the poop of the vessel. Now leaning on the netting of the forecastle, now on the taffrail, I devoured with eagerness the soft foam which whitened the sea as far as the eye could reach; and how often have I shared the emotion of the majority of the crew, when some capricious whale raised its black back above the waves! The poop of the vessel was crowded in a moment. The cabins poured forth a torrent of sailors and officers, each with heaving breast and troubled eye watching the course of the cetacean. I looked and looked, till I was nearly blind, whilst Conseil, always phlegmatic, kept repeating in a calm voice: "If, sir, you would not squint so much, you would see better!" But vain excitement! The _Abraham Lincoln_ checked its speed and made for the animal signalled, a simple whale, or common cachalot, which soon disappeared amidst a storm of execration.
But the weather was good. The voyage was being accomplished under the most favourable auspices. It was then the bad season in Australia, the July of that zone corresponding to our January in Europe, but the sea was beautiful and easily scanned round a vast circumference. The 20th of July, the tropic of Capricorn was cut by 105° of longitude, and the 27th of the same month we crossed the equator on the 110th meridian. This passed, the frigate took a more decided westerly direction, and scoured the central waters of the Pacific. Commander Farragut thought, and with reason, that it was better to remain in deep water, and keep clear of continents or islands, which the beast itself seemed to shun (perhaps because there was not enough water for him! suggested the greater part of the crew). The frigate passed at some distance from the Marquesas and the Sandwich Islands, crossed the tropic of Cancer, and made for the China Seas. We were on the theatre of the last diversions of the monster: and, to say truth, we no longer _lived_ on board. Hearts palpitated, fearfully preparing themselves for future incurable aneurism. The entire ship's crew were undergoing a nervous excitement, of which I can give no idea: they could not eat, they could not sleep-twenty times a day, a misconception or an optical illusion of some sailor seated on the taffrail, would cause dreadful perspirations, and these emotions, twenty times repeated, kept us in a state of excitement so violent that a reaction was unavoidable. And truly, reaction soon showed itself. For three months, during which a day seemed an age, the _Abraham Lincoln_ furrowed all the waters of the Northern Pacific, running at whales, making sharp deviations from her course, veering suddenly from one tack to another, stopping suddenly, putting on steam, and backing ever and anon at the risk of deranging her machinery, and not one point of the Japanese or American coast was left unexplored.
The warmest partisans of the enterprise now became its most ardent detractors. Reaction mounted from the crew to the captain himself, and certainly, had it not been for resolute determination on the part of Captain Farragut, the frigate would have headed due southward. This useless search could not last much longer. The _Abraham Lincoln_ had nothing to reproach herself with, she had done her best to succeed. Never had an American ship's crew shown more zeal or patience; its failure could not be placed to their charge-there remained nothing but to return.
This was represented to the commander. The sailors could not hide their discontent, and the service suffered. I will not say there was a mutiny on board, but after a reasonable period of obstinacy, Captain Farragut (as Columbus did) asked for three days' patience. If in three days the monster did not appear, the man at the helm should give three turns of the wheel, and the _Abraham Lincoln_ would make for the European seas. This promise was made on the 2nd of November. It had the effect of rallying the ship's crew. The ocean was watched with renewed attention. Each one wished for a last glance in which to sum up his remembrance. Glasses were used with feverish activity. It was a grand defiance given to the giant narwhal, and he could scarcely fail to answer the summons and "appear."
Two days passed, the steam was at half pressure; a thousand schemes were tried to attract the attention and stimulate the apathy of the animal in case it should be met in those parts. Large quantities of bacon were trailed in the wake of the ship, to the great satisfaction (I must say) of the sharks. Small craft radiated in all directions round the _Abraham Lincoln_ as she lay to, and did not leave a spot of the sea unexplored. But the night of the 4th of November arrived without the unveiling of this submarine mystery.
The next day, the 5th of November, at twelve, the delay would (morally speaking) expire; after that time, Commander Farragut, faithful to his promise, was to turn the course to the south-east and abandon for ever the northern regions of the Pacific.
The frigate was then in 31° 15′ north latitude and 136° 42′ east longitude. The coast of Japan still remained less than two hundred miles to leeward. Night was approaching. They had just struck eight bells; large clouds veiled the face of the moon, then in its first quarter. The sea undulated peaceably under the stern of the vessel. At that moment I was leaning forward on the starboard netting. Conseil, standing near me, was looking straight before him. The crew, perched in the ratlines, examined the horizon, which contracted and darkened by degrees. Officers with their night glasses scoured the growing darkness; sometimes the ocean sparkled under the rays of the moon, which darted between two clouds, then all trace of light was lost in the darkness.
In looking at Conseil, I could see he was undergoing a little of the general influence. At least I thought so. Perhaps for the first time his nerves vibrated to a sentiment of curiosity.
"Come, Conseil," said I, "this is the last chance of pocketing the two thousand dollars."
"May I be permitted to say, sir," replied Conseil, "that I never reckoned on getting the prize; and, had the government of the Union offered a hundred thousand dollars, it would have been none the poorer."
"You are right, Conseil. It is a foolish affair after all, and one upon which we entered too lightly. What time lost, what useless emotions! We should have been back in France six months ago."
"In your little room, sir," replied Conseil, "and in your museum, sir, and I should have already classed all your fossils, sir. And the Babiroussa would have been installed in its cage in the Jardin des Plantes, and have drawn all the curious people of the capital!" "As you say, Conseil. I fancy we shall run a fair chance of being laughed at for our pains."
"That's tolerably certain," replied Conseil, quietly; "I think they will make fun of you, sir. And, must I say it?"
"Go on, my good friend."
"Well, sir, you will only get your deserts."
"Indeed!"
"When one has the honour of being a savant as you are, sir, one should not expose one's self to--"
Conseil had not time to finish his compliment. In the midst of general silence a voice had just been heard. It was the voice of Ned Land shouting-
"Look out there! The very thing we are looking for-on our weather beam!"
At this cry the whole ship's crew hurried towards the harpooner,-commander, officers, masters, sailors, cabin boys; even the engineers left their engines, and the stokers their furnaces. The order to stop her had been given, and the frigate now simply went on by her own momentum. The darkness was then profound, and however good the Canadian's eyes were, I asked myself how he had managed to see, and what he had been able to see. My heart beat as if it would break. But Ned Land was not mistaken, and we all perceived the object he pointed to. At two cables' length from the _Abraham Lincoln_, on the starboard quarter, the sea seemed to be illuminated all over. It was not a mere phosphoric phenomenon. The monster emerged some fathoms from the water, and then threw out that very intense but inexplicable light mentioned in the report of several captains. This magnificent irradiation must have been produced by an agent of great _shining_ power. The luminous part traced on the sea an immense oval, much elongated, the centre of which condensed a burning heat, whose overpowering brilliancy died out by successive gradations. "It is only an agglomeration of phosphoric particles," cried one of the officers.
"No, sir, certainly not," I replied. "Never did pholades or salpæ produce such a powerful light. That brightness is of an essentially electrical nature. Besides, see, see! it moves; it is moving forwards, backwards; it is darting towards us!"
A general cry rose from the frigate.
"Silence!" said the Captain; "up with the helm, reverse the engines." The steam was shut off, and the _Abraham Lincoln_, beating to port, described a semicircle.
"Right the helm, go ahead," cried the Captain.
These orders were executed, and the frigate moved rapidly from the burning light.
I was mistaken. She tried to sheer off, but the supernatural animal approached with a velocity double her own.
We gasped for breath. Stupefaction more than fear made us dumb and motionless. The animal gained on us, sporting with the waves. It made the round of the frigate, which was then making fourteen knots, and enveloped it with its electric rings like luminous dust. Then it moved away two or three miles, leaving a phosphorescent track, like those volumes of steam that the express trains leave behind. All at once from the dark line of the horizon whither it retired to gain its momentum, the monster rushed suddenly towards the _Abraham Lincoln_ with alarming rapidity, stopped suddenly about twenty feet from the hull, and died out,-not diving under the water, for its brilliancy did not abate,-but suddenly, and as if the source of this brilliant emanation was exhausted. Then it reappeared on the other side of the vessel, as if it had turned and slid under the hull. Any moment a collision might have occurred which would have been fatal to us. However, I was astonished at the manœuvres of the frigate. She fled and did not attack. On the captain's face, generally so impassive, was an expression of unaccountable astonishment.
"Mr. Aronnax," he said, "I do not know with what formidable being I have to deal, and I will not imprudently risk my frigate in the midst of this darkness. Besides, how attack this unknown thing, how defend one's self from it? Wait for daylight, and the scene will change." "You have no further doubt, captain, of the nature of the animal?" "No, sir; it is evidently a gigantic narwhal, and an electric one." "Perhaps," added I, "one can only approach it with a gymnotus or a torpedo."
"Undoubtedly," replied the captain, "if it possesses such dreadful power, it is the most terrible animal that ever was created. That is why, sir, I must be on my guard."
The crew were on their feet all night. No one thought of sleep. The _Abraham Lincoln_, not being able to struggle with such velocity, had moderated its pace, and sailed at half speed. For its part, the narwhal, imitating the frigate, let the waves rock it at will, and seemed decided not to leave the scene of the struggle. Towards midnight, however, it disappeared, or, to use a more appropriate term, it "died out" like a large glow-worm. Had it fled? One could only fear, not hope. But at seven minutes to one o'clock in the morning a deafening whistling was heard, like that produced by a body of water rushing with great violence.
The captain, Ned Land, and I, were then on the poop, eagerly peering through the profound darkness.
"Ned Land," asked the commander, "you have often heard the roaring of whales?"
"Often, sir; but never such whales the sight of which brought me in two thousand dollars. If I can only approach within four harpoon lengths of it!"
"But to approach it," said the commander, "I ought to put a whaler at your disposal?"
"Certainly, sir."
"That will be trifling with the lives of my men." "And mine too," simply said the harpooner.
Towards two o'clock in the morning, the burning light reappeared, not less intense, about five miles to windward of the _Abraham Lincoln_. Notwithstanding the distance, and the noise of the wind and sea, one heard distinctly the loud strokes of the animal's tail, and even its panting breath. It seemed that, at the moment that the enormous narwhal had come to take breath at the surface of the water, the air was engulfed in its lungs, like the steam in the vast cylinders of a machine of two thousand horse-power.
"Hum!" thought I, "a whale with the strength of a cavalry regiment would be a pretty whale!"
We were on the _qui vive_ till daylight, and prepared for the combat. The fishing implements were laid along the hammock nettings. The second lieutenant loaded the blunderbusses, which could throw harpoons to the distance of a mile, and long duck-guns, with explosive bullets, which inflicted mortal wounds even to the most terrible animals. Ned Land contented himself with sharpening his harpoon-a terrible weapon in his hands.
At six o'clock day began to break; and, with the first glimmer of light, the electric light of the narwhal disappeared. At seven o'clock the day was sufficiently advanced, but a very thick sea fog obscured our view, and the best spy-glasses could not pierce it. That caused disappointment and anger.
I climbed the mizzen-mast. Some officers were already perched on the mast heads. At eight o'clock the fog lay heavily on the waves, and its thick scrolls rose little by little. The horizon grew wider and clearer at the same time. Suddenly, just as on the day before, Ned Land's voice was heard:
"The thing itself on the port quarter!" cried the harpooner. Every eye was turned towards the point indicated. There, a mile and a half from the frigate, a long blackish body emerged a yard above the waves. Its tail, violently agitated, produced a considerable eddy. Never did a caudal appendage beat the sea with such violence. An immense track, of dazzling whiteness, marked the passage of the animal, and described a long curve.
The frigate approached the cetacean. I examined it thoroughly. The reports of the _Shannon_ and of the _Helvetia_ had rather exaggerated its size, and I estimated its length at only two hundred and fifty feet. As to its dimensions, I could only conjecture them to be admirably proportioned. While I watched this phenomenon, two jets of steam and water were ejected from its vents, and rose to the height of 120 feet; thus I ascertained its way of breathing. I concluded definitely that it belonged to the vertebrate branch, class mammalia. The crew waited impatiently for their chief's orders. The latter, after having observed the animal attentively, called the engineer. The engineer ran to him.
"Sir," said the commander, "you have steam up?"
"Yes, sir," answered the engineer.
"Well, make up your fires and put on all steam."
Three hurrahs greeted this order. The time for the struggle had arrived. Some moments after, the two funnels of the frigate vomited torrents of black smoke, and the bridge quaked under the trembling of the boilers.
The _Abraham Lincoln_, propelled by her wonderful screw, went straight at the animal. The latter allowed it to come within half a cable's length; then, as if disdaining to dive, it took a little turn, and stopped a short distance off.
This pursuit lasted nearly three-quarters of an hour, without the frigate gaining two yards on the cetacean. It was quite evident that at that rate we should never come up with it.
"Well, Mr. Land," asked the captain, "do you advise me to put the boats out to sea?"
"No, sir," replied Ned Land; "because we shall not take that beast easily."
"What shall we do then?"
"Put on more steam if you can, sir. With your leave, I mean to post myself under the bowsprit, and if we get within harpooning distance, I
shall throw my harpoon."
"Go, Ned," said the captain. "Engineer, put on more pressure." Ned Land went to his post. The fires were increased, the screw revolved forty-three times a minute, and the steam poured out of the valves. We heaved the log, and calculated that the _Abraham Lincoln_ was going at the rate of 18½ miles an hour.
But the accursed animal swam too at the rate of 18½ miles an hour. For a whole hour, the frigate kept up this pace, without gaining six feet. It was humiliating for one of the swiftest sailers in the American navy. A stubborn anger seized the crew; the sailors abused the monster, who, as before, disdained to answer them; the captain no longer contented himself with twisting his beard-he gnawed it.
The engineer was again called.
"You have turned full steam in?"
"Yes, sir," replied the engineer.
The speed of the _Abraham Lincoln_ increased. Its masts trembled down to their stepping holes, and the clouds of smoke could hardly find way out of the narrow funnels.
They heaved the log a second time.
"Well?" asked the captain of the man at the wheel. "Nineteen miles and three-tenths, sir."
"Clap on more steam."
The engineer obeyed. The manometer showed ten degrees. But the cetacean grew warm itself, no doubt; for without straining itself, it made
19-3/10 miles.
What a pursuit! No, I cannot describe the emotion that vibrated through me. Ned Land kept his post, harpoon in hand. Several times the animal let us gain upon it.-"We shall catch it! we shall catch it!" cried the Canadian. But just as he was going to strike, the cetacean stole away with a rapidity that could not be estimated at less than thirty miles an hour, and even during our maximum of speed, it bullied the frigate, going round and round it. A cry of fury broke from everyone! At noon we were no further advanced than at eight o'clock in the morning.
The captain then decided to take more direct means. "Ah!" said he, "that animal goes quicker than the _Abraham Lincoln_. Very well! we will see whether it will escape these conical bullets. Send your men to the forecastle, sir."
The forecastle gun was immediately loaded and slewed round. But the shot passed some feet above the cetacean, which was half a mile off. "Another, more to the right," cried the commander, "and five dollars to whoever will hit that infernal beast."
An old gunner with a grey beard-that I can see now-with steady eye and grave face, went up to the gun and took a long aim. A loud report was heard, with which were mingled the cheers of the crew. [Illustration] An old grey-bearded gunner . . . . The bullet did its work; it hit the animal, but not fatally, and sliding off the rounded surface, was lost in two miles depth of sea. The chase began again, and the captain, leaning towards me, said- "I will pursue that beast till my frigate bursts up." "Yes," answered I; "and you will be quite right to do it." I wished the beast would exhaust itself, and not be insensible to fatigue like a steam engine! But it was of no use. Hours passed, without its showing any signs of exhaustion.
However, it must be said in praise of the _Abraham Lincoln_, that she struggled on indefatigably. I cannot reckon the distance she made under three hundred miles during this unlucky day, November the 6th. But night came on, and overshadowed the rough ocean.
Now I thought our expedition was at an end, and that we should never again see the extraordinary animal. I was mistaken. At ten minutes to eleven in the evening, the electric light reappeared three miles to windward of the frigate, as pure, as intense as during the preceding night.
The narwhal seemed motionless; perhaps, tired with its day's work, it slept, letting itself float with the undulation of the waves. Now was a chance of which the captain resolved to take advantage. He gave his orders. The _Abraham Lincoln_ kept up half steam, and advanced cautiously so as not to awake its adversary. It is no rare thing to meet in the middle of the ocean whales so sound asleep that they can be successfully attacked, and Ned Land had harpooned more than one during its sleep. The Canadian went to take his place again under the bowsprit.
The frigate approached noiselessly, stopped at two cables' lengths from the animal, and following its track. No one breathed; a deep silence reigned on the bridge. We were not a hundred feet from the burning focus, the light of which increased and dazzled our eyes. At this moment, leaning on the forecastle bulwark, I saw below me Ned Land grappling the martingale in one hand, brandishing his terrible harpoon in the other, scarcely twenty feet from the motionless animal. Suddenly his arm straightened, and the harpoon was thrown; I heard the sonorous stroke of the weapon, which seemed to have struck a hard body. The electric light went out suddenly, and two enormous waterspouts broke over the bridge of the frigate, rushing like a torrent from stem to stern, overthrowing men, and breaking the lashings of the spars. A fearful shock followed, and, thrown over the rail without having time to stop myself, I fell into the sea.
This unexpected fall so stunned me that I have no clear recollection of my sensations at the time. I was at first drawn down to a depth of about twenty feet. I am a good swimmer (though without pretending to rival Byron or Edgar Poe, who were masters of the art), and in that plunge I did not lose my presence of mind. Two vigorous strokes brought me to the surface of the water. My first care was to look for the frigate. Had the crew seen me disappear? Had the _Abraham Lincoln_ veered round? Would the captain put out a boat? Might I hope to be saved?
The darkness was intense. I caught a glimpse of a black mass disappearing in the east, its beacon lights dying out in the distance.
It was the frigate! I was lost.
"Help, help!" I shouted, swimming towards the _Abraham Lincoln_ in desperation.
My clothes encumbered me; they seemed glued to my body, and paralysed my movements.
I was sinking! I was suffocating!
"Help!"
This was my last cry. My mouth filled with water; I struggled against being drawn down the abyss. Suddenly my clothes were seized by a strong hand, and I felt myself quickly drawn up to the surface of the sea; and I heard, yes, I heard these words pronounced in my ear- "If master would be so good as to lean on my shoulder, master would swim with much greater ease."
I seized with one hand my faithful Conseil's arm.
"Is it you?" said I, "you?"
"Myself," answered Conseil; "and waiting master's orders." "That shock threw you as well as me into the sea?" "No; but being in my master's service, I followed him." The worthy fellow thought that was but natural.
"And the frigate?" I asked.
"The frigate?" replied Conseil, turning on his back; "I think that master had better not count too much on her."
"You think so?"
"I say that, at the time I threw myself into the sea, I heard the men at the wheel say, 'The screw and the rudder are broken.'"
"Broken?"
"Yes, broken by the monster's teeth. It is the only injury the _Abraham Lincoln_ has sustained. But it is a bad look out for us-she no longer answers her helm."
"Then we are lost!"
"Perhaps so," calmly answered Conseil. "However, we have still several hours before us, and one can do a good deal in some hours." Conseil's imperturbable coolness set me up again. I swam more vigorously; but, cramped by my clothes, which stuck to me like a leaden weight, I felt great difficulty in bearing up. Conseil saw this. "Will master let me make a slit?" said he; and, slipping an open knife under my clothes, he ripped them up from top to bottom very rapidly. Then he cleverly slipped them off me, while I swam for both of us. Then I did the same for Conseil, and we continued to swim near to each other.
Nevertheless, our situation was no less terrible. Perhaps our disappearance had not been noticed; and if it had been, the frigate could not tack, being without its helm. Conseil argued on this supposition, and laid his plans accordingly. This phlegmatic boy was perfectly self-possessed. We then decided that, as our only chance of safety was being picked up by the _Abraham Lincoln's_ boats, we ought to manage so as to wait for them as long as possible. I resolved then to husband our strength, so that both should not be exhausted at the same time; and this is how we managed: while one of us lay on our back, quite still, with arms crossed, and legs stretched out, the other would swim and push the other on in front. This towing business did not last more than ten minutes each; and relieving each other thus, we could swim on for some hours, perhaps till daybreak. Poor chance! but hope is so firmly rooted in the heart of man! Moreover, there were two of us. Indeed I declare (though it may seem improbable) if I sought to destroy all hope,-if I wished to despair, I could not.
The collision of the frigate with the cetacean had occurred about eleven o'clock the evening before. I reckoned then we should have eight hours to swim before sunrise, an operation quite practicable if we relieved each other. The sea, very calm, was in our favour. Sometimes I tried to pierce the intense darkness that was only dispelled by the phosphorescence caused by our movements. I watched the luminous waves that broke over my hand, whose mirror-like surface was spotted with silvery rings. One might have said that we were in a bath of quicksilver.
Near one o'clock in the morning, I was seized with dreadful fatigue. My limbs stiffened under the strain of violent cramp. Conseil was obliged to keep me up, and our preservation devolved on him alone. I heard the poor boy pant; his breathing became short and hurried. I found that he could not keep up much longer.
"Leave me! leave me!" I said to him.
"Leave my master? Never!" replied he. "I would drown first." Just then the moon appeared through the fringes of a thick cloud that the wind was driving to the east. The surface of the sea glittered with its rays. This kindly light reanimated us. My head got better again. I looked at all points of the horizon. I saw the frigate! She was five miles from us, and looked like a dark mass, hardly discernible. But no boats!
I would have cried out. But what good would it have been at such a distance! My swollen lips could utter no sounds. Conseil could articulate some words, and I heard him repeat at intervals, "Help!
help!"
Our movements were suspended for an instant; we listened. It might be only a singing in the ear, but it seemed to me as if a cry answered the cry from Conseil.
"Did you hear?" I murmured.
"Yes! Yes!"
And Conseil gave one more despairing call.
This time there was no mistake! A human voice responded to ours! Was it the voice of another unfortunate creature, abandoned in the middle of the ocean, some other victim of the shock sustained by the vessel? Or rather was it a boat from the frigate, that was hailing us in the darkness?
Conseil made a last effort, and, leaning on my shoulder, while I struck out in a despairing effort, he raised himself half out of the water, then fell back exhausted.
"What did you see?"
"I saw"-murmured he; "I saw-but do not talk-reserve all your strength!" What had he seen? Then, I know not why, the thought of the monster came into my head for the first time! But that voice! The time is past for Jonahs to take refuge in whales' bellies! However, Conseil was towing me again. He raised his head sometimes, looked before us, and uttered a cry of recognition, which was responded to by a voice that came nearer and nearer. I scarcely heard it. My strength was exhausted; my fingers stiffened; my hand afforded me support no longer; my mouth, convulsively opening, filled with salt water. Cold crept over me. I raised my head for the last time, then I sank.
At this moment a hard body struck me. I clung to it: then I felt that I was being drawn up, that I was brought to the surface of the water, that my chest collapsed:-I fainted.
It is certain that I soon came to, thanks to the vigorous rubbings that I received. I half opened my eyes.
"Conseil!" I murmured.
"Does master call me?" asked Conseil.
Just then, by the waning light of the moon which was sinking down to the horizon, I saw a face which was not Conseil's and which I
immediately recognised.
"Ned!" I cried.
"The same, sir, who is seeking his prize!" replied the Canadian. "Were you thrown into the sea by the shock to the frigate?" "Yes, Professor; but more fortunate than you, I was able to find a footing almost directly upon a floating island."
"An island?"
"Or, more correctly speaking, on our gigantic narwhal."
"Explain yourself, Ned!"
"Only I soon found out why my harpoon had not entered its skin and was blunted."
"Why, Ned, why?"
"Because, Professor, that beast is made of sheet iron." The Canadian's last words produced a sudden revolution in my brain. I wriggled myself quickly to the top of the being, or object, half out of the water, which served us for a refuge. I kicked it. It was evidently a hard impenetrable body, and not the soft substance that forms the bodies of the great marine mammalia. But this hard body might be a bony carapace, like that of the antediluvian animals; and I should be free to class this monster among amphibious reptiles, such as tortoises or alligators.
Well, no! the blackish back that supported me was smooth, polished, without scales. The blow produced a metallic sound; and incredible though it may be, it seemed, I might say, as if it was made of riveted plates.
There was no doubt about it! This monster, this natural phenomenon that had puzzled the learned world, and overthrown and misled the imagination of seamen of both hemispheres, it must be owned, a still more astonishing phenomenon, inasmuch as it was a simply human construction.
We had no time to lose, however. We were lying upon the back of a sort of submarine boat, which appeared (as far as I could judge) like a huge fish of steel. Ned Land's mind was made up on this point. Conseil and I
could only agree with him.
Just then a bubbling began at the back of this strange thing (which was evidently propelled by a screw), and it began to move. We had only just time to seize hold of the upper part, which rose about seven feet out of the water, and happily its speed was not great. "As long as it sails horizontally," muttered Ned Land, "I do not mind; but if it takes a fancy to dive, I would not give two straws for my life."
The Canadian might have said still less. It became really necessary to communicate with the beings, whatever they were, shut up inside the machine. I searched all over the outside for an aperture, a panel, or a man-hole, to use a technical expression; but the lines of the iron rivets, solidly driven into the joints of the iron plates, were clear and uniform. Besides, the moon disappeared then, and left us in total darkness.
At last this long night passed. My indistinct remembrance prevents my describing all the impressions it made. I can only recall one circumstance. During some lulls of the wind and sea, I fancied I heard several times vague sounds, a sort of fugitive harmony produced by words of command. What was then the mystery of this submarine craft, of which the whole world vainly sought an explanation? What kind of beings existed in this strange boat? What mechanical agent caused its prodigious speed?
Daybreak appeared. The morning mists surrounded us, but they soon cleared off. I was about to examine the hull, which formed on deck a kind of horizontal platform, when I felt it gradually sinking. "Oh! confound it!" cried Ned Land, kicking the resounding plate. "Open, you inhospitable rascals!"
Happily the sinking movement ceased. Suddenly a noise, like iron works violently pushed aside, came from the interior of the boat. One iron plate was moved, a man appeared, uttered an odd cry, and disappeared immediately.
Some moments after, eight strong men, with masked faces, appeared noiselessly, and drew us down into their formidable machine.
This forcible abduction, so roughly carried out, was accomplished with the rapidity of lightning. I shivered all over. Whom had we to deal with? No doubt some new sort of pirates, who explored the sea in their own way.
Hardly had the narrow panel closed upon me, when I was enveloped in darkness. My eyes, dazzled with the outer light, could distinguish nothing. I felt my naked feet cling to the rungs of an iron ladder. Ned Land and Conseil, firmly seized, followed me. At the bottom of the ladder, a door opened, and shut after us immediately with a bang. We were alone. Where, I could not say, hardly imagine. All was black, and such a dense black that, after some minutes, my eyes had not been able to discern even the faintest glimmer.
Meanwhile, Ned Land, furious at these proceedings, gave free vent to his indignation.
"Confound it!" cried he, "here are people who come up to the Scotch for hospitality. They only just miss being cannibals. I should not be surprised at it, but I declare that they shall not eat me without my protesting."
"Calm yourself, friend Ned, calm yourself," replied Conseil, quietly. "Do not cry out before you are hurt. We are not quite done for yet." "Not quite," sharply replied the Canadian, "but pretty near, at all events. Things look black. Happily, my bowie knife I have still, and I can always see well enough to use it. The first of these pirates who lays a hand on me--"
"Do not excite yourself, Ned," I said to the harpooner, "and do not compromise us by useless violence. Who knows that they will not listen to us? Let us rather try to find out where we are." I groped about. In five steps I came to an iron wall, made of plates bolted together. Then turning back I struck against a wooden table, near which were ranged several stools. The boards of this prison were concealed under a thick mat of phormium, which deadened the noise of the feet. The bare walls revealed no trace of window or door. Conseil, going round the reverse way, met me, and we went back to the middle of the cabin, which measured about twenty feet by ten. As to its height, Ned Land, in spite of his own great height, could not measure it. Half an hour had already passed without our situation being bettered, when the dense darkness suddenly gave way to extreme light. Our prison was suddenly lighted-that is to say, it became filled with a luminous matter, so strong that I could not bear it at first. In its whiteness and intensity I recognised that electric light which played round the submarine boat like a magnificent phenomenon of phosphorescence. After shutting my eyes involuntarily, I opened them, and saw that this luminous agent came from a half globe, unpolished, placed in the roof of the cabin.
"At last one can see," cried Ned Land, who, knife in hand, stood on the defensive.
"Yes," said I; "but we are still in the dark about ourselves." "Let master have patience," said the imperturbable Conseil. The sudden lighting of the cabin enabled me to examine it minutely. It only contained a table and five stools. The invisible door might be hermetically sealed. No noise was heard. All seemed dead in the interior of this boat. Did it move, did it float on the surface of the ocean, or did it dive into its depths? I could not guess. A noise of bolts was now heard, the door opened, and two men appeared. One was short, very muscular, broad-shouldered, with robust limbs, strong head, an abundance of black hair, thick moustache, a quick penetrating look, and the vivacity which characterises the population of Southern France.
The second stranger merits a more detailed description. A disciple of Gratiolet or Engel would have read his face like an open book. I made out his prevailing qualities directly:-self-confidence,-because his head was well set on his shoulders, and his black eyes looked around with cold assurance; calmness,-for his skin, rather pale, showed his coolness of blood; energy,-evinced by the rapid contraction of his lofty brows; and courage,-because his deep breathing denoted great power of lungs.
Whether this person was thirty-five or fifty years of age, I could not say. He was tall, had a large forehead, straight nose, a clearly cut mouth, beautiful teeth, with fine taper hands, indicative of a highly nervous temperament. This man was certainly the most admirable specimen I had ever met. One particular feature was his eyes, rather far from each other, and which could take in nearly a quarter of the horizon at once.
This faculty-(I verified it later)-gave him a range of vision far superior to Ned Land's. When this stranger fixed upon an object, his eyebrows met, his large eyelids closed around so as to contract the range of his vision, and he looked as if he magnified the objects lessened by distance, as if he pierced those sheets of water so opaque to our eyes, and as if he read the very depths of the seas. The two strangers, with caps made from the fur of the sea otter, and shod with sea boots of seal's skin, were dressed in clothes of a particular texture, which allowed free movement of the limbs. The taller of the two, evidently the chief on board, examined us with great attention, without saying a word; then turning to his companion, talked with him in an unknown tongue. It was a sonorous, harmonious, and flexible dialect, the vowels seeming to admit of very varied accentuation.
The other replied by a shake of the head, and added two or three perfectly incomprehensible words. Then he seemed to question me by a look.
I replied in good French that I did not know his language; but he seemed not to understand me, and my situation became more embarrassing. "If master were to tell our story," said Conseil, "perhaps these gentlemen may understand some words."
I began to tell our adventures, articulating each syllable clearly, and without omitting one single detail. I announced our names and rank, introducing in person Professor Aronnax, his servant Conseil, and master Ned Land, the harpooner.
The man with the soft calm eyes listened to me quietly, even politely, and with extreme attention; but nothing in his countenance indicated that he had understood my story. When I finished, he said not a word. There remained one resource, to speak English. Perhaps they would know this almost universal language. I knew it, as well as the German language,-well enough to read it fluently, but not to speak it correctly. But, anyhow, we must make ourselves understood. "Go on in your turn," I said to the harpooner; "speak your best Anglo-Saxon, and try to do better than I."
Ned did not beg off, and recommenced our story.
To his great disgust, the harpooner did not seem to have made himself more intelligible than I had. Our visitors did not stir. They evidently understood neither the language of Arago nor of Faraday. Very much embarrassed, after having vainly exhausted our speaking resources, I knew not what part to take, when Conseil said- "If master will permit me, I will relate it in German." But in spite of the elegant terms and good accent of the narrator, the German language had no success. At last, nonplussed, I tried to remember my first lessons, and to narrate our adventures in Latin, but with no better success. This last attempt being of no avail, the two strangers exchanged some words in their unknown language, and retired.
The door shut.
"It is an infamous shame," cried Ned Land, who broke out for the twentieth time. "We speak to those rogues in French, English, German, and Latin, and not one of them has the politeness to answer!" "Calm yourself," I said to the impetuous Ned, "anger will do no good." "But do you see, Professor," replied our irascible companion, "that we shall absolutely die of hunger in this iron cage?" "Bah!" said Conseil, philosophically; "we can hold out some time yet." "My friends," I said, "we must not despair. We have been worse off than this. Do me the favour to wait a little before forming an opinion upon the commander and crew of this boat."
"My opinion is formed," replied Ned Land, sharply. "They are rascals."
"Good! and from what country?"
"From the land of rogues!"
"My brave Ned, that country is not clearly indicated on the map of the world; but I admit that the nationality of the two strangers is hard to determine. Neither English, French, nor German, that is quite certain. However, I am inclined to think that the commander and his companion were born in low latitudes. There is southern blood in them. But I cannot decide by their appearance whether they are Spaniards, Turks, Arabians, or Indians. As to their language, it is quite incomprehensible."
"There is the disadvantage of not knowing all languages," said Conseil, "or the disadvantage of not having one universal language." As he said these words, the door opened. A steward entered. He brought us clothes, coats and trousers, made of a stuff I did not know. I hastened to dress myself, and my companions followed my example. During that time, the steward-dumb, perhaps deaf-had arranged the table, and laid three plates.
"This is something like," said Conseil.
"Bah!" said the rancorous harpooner, "what do you suppose they eat here? Tortoise liver, filleted shark, and beefsteaks from sea-dogs."
"We shall see," said Conseil.
The dishes, of bell metal, were placed on the table, and we took our places. Undoubtedly we had to do with civilised people, and, had it not been for the electric light which flooded us, I could have fancied I was in the dining-room of the Adelphi Hotel at Liverpool, or at the Grand Hotel in Paris. I must say, however, that there was neither bread nor wine. The water was fresh and clear, but it was water, and did not suit Ned Land's taste. Amongst the dishes which were brought to us, I recognised several fish delicately dressed; but of some, although excellent, I could give no opinion, neither could I tell to what kingdom they belonged, whether animal or vegetable. As to the dinner service, it was elegant, and in perfect taste. Each utensil, spoon, fork, knife, plate, had a letter engraved on it, with a motto above it, of which this is an exact facsimile:-
The letter N was no doubt the initial of the name of the enigmatical person, who commanded at the bottom of the sea.
Ned and Conseil did not reflect much. They devoured the food, and I did likewise. I was, besides, reassured as to our fate; and it seemed evident that our hosts would not let us die of want. However, everything has an end, everything passes away, even the hunger of people who have not eaten for fifteen hours. Our appetites satisfied, we felt overcome with sleep.
"Faith! I shall sleep well," said Conseil.
"So shall I," replied Ned Land.
My two companions stretched themselves on the cabin carpet, and were soon sound asleep. For my own part, too many thoughts crowded my brain, too many insoluble questions pressed upon me, too many fancies kept my eyes half open. Where were we? What strange power carried us on? I felt-or rather fancied I felt-the machine sinking down to the lowest beds of the sea. Dreadful nightmares beset me; I saw in these mysterious asylums a world of unknown animals, amongst which this submarine boat seemed to be of the same kind, living, moving, and formidable as they. Then my brain grew calmer, my imagination wandered into vague unconsciousness, and I soon fell into a deep sleep.
How long we slept I do not know; but our sleep must have lasted long, for it rested us completely from our fatigues. I woke first. My companions had not moved, and were still stretched in their corner. Hardly roused from my somewhat hard couch, I felt my brain freed, my mind clear. I then began an attentive examination of our cell. Nothing was changed inside. The prison was still a prison,-the prisoners, prisoners. However, the steward, during our sleep, had cleared the table. I breathed with difficulty. The heavy air seemed to oppress my lungs. Although the cell was large, we had evidently consumed a great part of the oxygen that it contained. Indeed, each man consumes, in one hour, the oxygen contained in more than 176 pints of air, and this air, charged (as then) with a nearly equal quantity of carbonic acid, becomes unbreathable.
It became necessary to renew the atmosphere of our prison, and no doubt the whole in the submarine boat. That gave rise to a question in my mind. How would the commander of this floating dwelling-place proceed? Would he obtain air by chemical means, in getting by heat the oxygen contained in chlorate of potash, and in absorbing carbonic acid by caustic potash? Or, a more convenient, economical, and consequently more probable alternative, would he be satisfied to rise and take breath at the surface of the water, like a cetacean, and so renew for twenty-four hours the atmospheric provision?
In fact, I was already obliged to increase my respirations to eke out of this cell the little oxygen it contained, when suddenly I was refreshed by a current of pure air, and perfumed with saline emanations. It was an invigorating sea breeze, charged with iodine. I opened my mouth wide, and my lungs saturated themselves with fresh particles.
At the same time I felt the boat rolling. The iron-plated monster had evidently just risen to the surface of the ocean to breathe, after the fashion of whales. I found out from that the mode of ventilating the boat.
When I had inhaled this air freely, I sought the conduit-pipe, which conveyed to us the beneficial whiff, and I was not long in finding it. Above the door was a ventilator, through which volumes of fresh air renewed the impoverished atmosphere of the cell.
I was making my observations, when Ned and Conseil awoke almost at the same time, under the influence of this reviving air. They rubbed their eyes, stretched themselves, and were on their feet in an instant. "Did master sleep well?" asked Conseil, with his usual politeness. "Very well, my brave boy. And you, Mr. Land?"
"Soundly, Professor. But I don't know if I am right or not; there seems to be a sea breeze!"
A seaman could not be mistaken, and I told the Canadian all that had passed during his sleep.
"Good!" said he; "that accounts for those roarings we heard, when the supposed narwhal sighted the _Abraham Lincoln_."
"Quite so, Master Land; it was taking breath."
"Only, Mr. Aronnax, I have no idea what o'clock it is, unless it is dinner-time."
"Dinner-time! my good fellow? Say rather breakfast-time, for we certainly have begun another day."
"So," said Conseil, "we have slept twenty-four hours?"
"That is my opinion."
"I will not contradict you," replied Ned Land. "But dinner or breakfast, the steward will be welcome, whichever he brings." "Master Land, we must conform to the rules on board, and I suppose our appetites are in advance of the dinner hour."
"That is just like you, friend Conseil," said Ned, impatiently. "You are never out of temper, always calm; you would return thanks before grace, and die of hunger rather than complain!"
Time was getting on, and we were fearfully hungry; and this time the steward did not appear. It was rather too long to leave us, if they really had good intentions towards us. Ned Land, tormented by the cravings of hunger, got still more angry; and, notwithstanding his promise, I dreaded an explosion when he found himself with one of the crew.
For two hours more Ned Land's temper increased; he cried, he shouted, but in vain. The walls were deaf. There was no sound to be heard in the boat: all was still as death. It did not move, for I should have felt the trembling motion of the hull under the influence of the screw. Plunged in the depths of the waters, it belonged no longer to earth:-this silence was dreadful.
I felt terrified, Conseil was calm, Ned Land roared. Just then a noise was heard outside. Steps sounded on the metal flags. The locks were turned, the door opened, and the steward appeared. Before I could rush forward to stop him, the Canadian had thrown him down, and held him by the throat. The steward was choking under the grip of his powerful hand.
Conseil was already trying to unclasp the harpooner's hand from his half-suffocated victim, and I was going to fly to the rescue, when suddenly I was nailed to the spot by hearing these words in French- "Be quiet, Master Land; and you, Professor, will you be so good as to listen to me?"
It was the commander of the vessel who thus spoke. At these words, Ned Land rose suddenly. The steward, nearly strangled, tottered out on a sign from his master; but such was the power of the commander on board, that not a gesture betrayed the resentment which this man must have felt towards the Canadian. Conseil, interested in spite of himself, I stupefied, awaited in silence the result of this scene.
The commander, leaning against the corner of a table with his arms folded, scanned us with profound attention. Did he hesitate to speak? Did he regret the words which he had just spoken in French? One might almost think so.
After some moments of silence, which not one of us dreamed of breaking, "Gentlemen," said he, in a calm and penetrating voice, "I speak French, English, German, and Latin equally well. I could, therefore, have answered you at our first interview, but I wished to know you first, then to reflect. The story told by each one, entirely agreeing in the main points, convinced me of your identity. I know now that chance has brought before me M. Pierre Aronnax, Professor of Natural History at the Museum of Paris, entrusted with a scientific mission abroad, Conseil, his servant, and Ned Land, of Canadian origin, harpooner on board the frigate _Abraham Lincoln_ of the navy of the United States of
America."
I bowed assent. It was not a question that the commander put to me. Therefore there was no answer to be made. This man expressed himself with perfect ease, without any accent. His sentences were well turned, his words clear, and his fluency of speech remarkable. Yet, I did not recognise in him a fellow-countryman.
He continued the conversation in these terms:
"You have doubtless thought, sir, that I have delayed long in paying you this second visit. The reason is that, your identity recognised, I wished to weigh maturely what part to act towards you. I have hesitated much. Most annoying circumstances have brought you into the presence of a man who has broken all the ties of humanity. You have come to trouble my existence."
"Unintentionally!" said I.
"Unintentionally?" replied the stranger, raising his voice a little; "was it unintentionally that the _Abraham Lincoln_ pursued me all over the seas? Was it unintentionally that you took passage in this frigate? Was it unintentionally that your cannon balls rebounded off the plating of my vessel? Was it unintentionally that Mr. Ned Land struck me with his harpoon?"
I detected a restrained irritation in these words. But to these recriminations I had a very natural answer to make and I made it. "Sir," said I, "no doubt you are ignorant of the discussions which have taken place concerning you in America and Europe. You do not know that divers accidents, caused by collisions with your submarine machine, have excited public feeling in the two continents. I omit the hypotheses without number by which it was sought to explain the inexplicable phenomenon of which you alone possess the secret. But you must understand that, in pursuing you over the high seas of the Pacific, the _Abraham Lincoln_ believed itself to be chasing some powerful sea-monster, of which it was necessary to rid the ocean at any price."
A half-smile curled the lips of the commander: then, in a calmer tone- "M. Aronnax," he replied, "dare you affirm that your frigate would not as soon have pursued and cannonaded a submarine boat as a monster?" This question embarrassed me, for certainly Captain Farragut might not have hesitated. He might have thought it his duty to destroy a contrivance of this kind, as he would a gigantic narwhal. "You understand then, sir," continued the stranger, "that I have the right to treat you as enemies?"
I answered nothing, purposely. For what good would it be to discuss such a proposition, when force could destroy the best arguments? "I have hesitated some time," continued the commander; "nothing obliged me to show you hospitality. If I chose to separate myself from you, I should have no interest in seeing you again; I could place you upon the deck of this vessel which has served you as a refuge, I could sink beneath the waters, and forget that you had ever existed. Would not that be my right?"
"It might be the right of a savage," I answered, "but not that of a civilised man."
"Professor," replied the commander, quickly, "I am not what you call a civilised man! I have done with society entirely, for reasons which I alone have the right of appreciating. I do not therefore obey its laws, and I desire you never to allude to them before me again!" This was said plainly. A flash of anger and disdain kindled in the eyes of the Unknown, and I had a glimpse of a terrible past in the life of this man. Not only had he put himself beyond the pale of human laws, but he had made himself independent of them, free in the strictest acceptation of the word, quite beyond their reach! Who then would dare to pursue him at the bottom of the sea, when, on its surface, he defied all attempts made against him? What vessel could resist the shock of his submarine monitor? What cuirass, however thick, could withstand the blows of his spur? No man could demand from him an account of his actions; God, if he believed in one-his conscience, if he had one-were the sole judges to whom he was answerable.
These reflections crossed my mind rapidly, whilst the stranger personage was silent, absorbed, and as if wrapped up in himself. I regarded him with fear mingled with interest, as doubtless, Œdipus regarded the Sphinx.
After rather a long silence, the commander resumed the conversation. "I have hesitated," said he, "but I have thought that my interest might be reconciled with that pity to which every human being has a right. You will remain on board my vessel, since fate has cast you there. You will be free; and, in exchange for this liberty, I shall only impose one single condition. Your word of honour to submit to it will suffice."
"Speak, sir," I answered. "I suppose this condition is one which a man of honour may accept?"
"Yes, sir; it is this. It is possible that certain events, unforeseen, may oblige me to consign you to your cabins for some hours or some days, as the case may be. As I desire never to use violence, I expect from you, more than all the others, a passive obedience. In thus acting, I take all the responsibility: I acquit you entirely, for I make it an impossibility for you to see what ought not to be seen. Do you accept this condition?"
Then things took place on board which, to say the least, were singular, and which ought not to be seen by people who were not placed beyond the pale of social laws. Amongst the surprises which the future was preparing for me, this might not be the least.
"We accept," I answered; "only I will ask your permission, sir, to address one question to you-one only."
"Speak, sir."
"You said that we should be free on board."
"Entirely."
"I ask you, then, what you mean by this liberty?" "Just the liberty to go, to come, to see, to observe even all that passes here,-save under rare circumstances,-the liberty, in short, which we enjoy ourselves, my companions and I."
It was evident that we did not understand one another. "Pardon me, sir," I resumed, "but this liberty is only what every prisoner has of pacing his prison. It cannot suffice us."
"It must suffice you, however."
"What! we must renounce for ever seeing our country, our friends, our relations again?"
"Yes, sir. But to renounce that unendurable worldly yoke which men believe to be liberty, is not perhaps so painful as you think." "Well," exclaimed Ned Land, "never will I give my word of honour not to try to escape."
"I did not ask you for your word of honour, Master Land," answered the commander, coldly.
"Sir," I replied, beginning to get angry in spite of myself, "you abuse your situation towards us; it is cruelty."
"No, sir, it is clemency. You are my prisoners of war. I keep you, when I could, by a word, plunge you into the depths of the ocean. You attacked me. You came to surprise a secret which no man in the world must penetrate,-the secret of my whole existence. And you think that I am going to send you back to that world which must know me no more? Never! In retaining you, it is not you whom I guard-it is myself." These words indicated a resolution taken on the part of the commander, against which no arguments would prevail.
"So, sir," I rejoined, "you give us simply the choice between life and death?"
"Simply."
"My friends," said I, "to a question thus put, there is nothing to answer. But no word of honour binds us to the master of this vessel." "None, sir," answered the Unknown.
Then, in a gentler tone, he continued-
"Now, permit me to finish what I have to say to you. I know you, M. Aronnax. You and your companions will not, perhaps, have so much to complain of in the chance which has bound you to my fate. You will find amongst the books which are my favourite study the work which you have published on 'the depths of the sea.' I have often read it. You have carried out your work as far as terrestrial science permitted you. But you do not know all-you have not seen all. Let me tell you then, Professor, that you will not regret the time passed on board my vessel. You are going to visit the land of marvels."
These words of the commander had a great effect upon me. I cannot deny it. My weak point was touched; and I forgot, for a moment, that the contemplation of these sublime subjects was not worth the loss of liberty. Besides, I trusted to the future to decide this grave question. So I contented myself with saying-
"By what name ought I to address you?"
"Sir," replied the commander, "I am nothing to you but Captain Nemo; and you and your companions are nothing to me but the passengers of the
Captain Nemo called. A steward appeared. The captain gave him his orders in that strange language which I did not understand. Then, turning towards the Canadian and Conseil-
"A repast awaits you in your cabin," said he. "Be so good as to follow this man.
"And now, M. Aronnax, our breakfast is ready. Permit me to lead the way."
"I am at your service, Captain."
I followed Captain Nemo; and as soon as I had passed through the door, I found myself in a kind of passage lighted by electricity, similar to the waist of a ship. After we had proceeded a dozen yards, a second door opened before me.
I then entered a dining-room, decorated and furnished in severe taste. High oaken sideboards, inlaid with ebony, stood at the two extremities of the room, and upon their shelves glittered china, porcelain, and glass of inestimable value. The plate on the table sparkled in the rays which the luminous ceiling shed around, while the light was tempered and softened by exquisite paintings.
In the centre of the room was a table richly laid out. Captain Nemo indicated the place I was to occupy.
The breakfast consisted of a certain number of dishes, the contents of which were furnished by the sea alone; and I was ignorant of the nature and mode of preparation of some of them. I acknowledged that they were good, but they had a peculiar flavour, which I easily became accustomed to. These different aliments appeared to me to be rich in phosphorus, and I thought they must have a marine origin.
Captain Nemo looked at me. I asked him no questions, but he guessed my thoughts, and answered of his own accord the questions which I was burning to address to him.
"The greater part of these dishes are unknown to you," he said to me. "However, you may partake of them without fear. They are wholesome and nourishing. For a long time I have renounced the food of the earth, and am never ill now. My crew, who are healthy, are fed on the same food." "So," said I, "all these eatables are the produce of the sea?" "Yes, Professor, the sea supplies all my wants. Sometimes I cast my nets in tow, and I draw them in ready to break. Sometimes I hunt in the midst of this element, which appears to be inaccessible to man, and quarry the game which dwells in my submarine forests. My flocks, like those of Neptune's old shepherds, graze fearlessly in the immense prairies of the ocean. I have a vast property there, which I cultivate myself, and which is always sown by the hand of the Creator of all things."
"I can understand perfectly, sir, that your nets furnish excellent fish for your table; I can understand also that you hunt aquatic game in your submarine forests; but I cannot understand at all how a particle of meat, no matter how small, can figure in your bill of fare." "This, which you believe to be meat, Professor, is nothing else than fillet of turtle. Here are also some dolphins' livers, which you take to be ragout of pork. My cook is a clever fellow, who excels in dressing these various products of the ocean. Taste all these dishes. Here is a preserve of holothuria, which a Malay would declare to be unrivalled in the world; here is a cream, of which the milk has been furnished by the cetacea, and the sugar by the great fucus of the North Sea; and lastly, permit me to offer you some preserve of anemones, which is equal to that of the most delicious fruits." I tasted, more from curiosity than as a connoisseur, whilst Captain Nemo enchanted me with his extraordinary stories.
"You like the sea, Captain?"
"Yes; I love it! The sea is everything. It covers seven-tenths of the terrestrial globe. Its breath is pure and healthy. It is an immense desert, where man is never lonely, for he feels life stirring on all sides. The sea is only the embodiment of a supernatural and wonderful existence. It is nothing but love and emotion; it is the 'Living Infinite,' as one of your poets has said. In fact, Professor, Nature manifests herself in it by her three kingdoms, mineral, vegetable, and animal. The sea is the vast reservoir of Nature. The globe began with sea, so to speak; and who knows if it will not end with it? In it is supreme tranquillity. The sea does not belong to despots. Upon its surface men can still exercise unjust laws, fight, tear one another to pieces, and be carried away with terrestrial horrors. But at thirty feet below its level, their reign ceases, their influence is quenched, and their power disappears. Ah! sir, live-live in the bosom of the waters! There only is independence! There I recognise no masters! There
I am free!"
Captain Nemo suddenly became silent in the midst of this enthusiasm, by which he was quite carried away. For a few moments he paced up and down, much agitated. Then he became more calm, regained his accustomed coldness of expression, and turning towards me-
"Now, Professor," said he, "if you wish to go over the Nautilus, I am at your service."
Captain Nemo rose. I followed him. A double door, contrived at the back of the dining-room, opened, and I entered a room equal in dimensions to that which I had just quitted.
It was a library. High pieces of furniture, of black violet ebony inlaid with brass, supported upon their wide shelves a great number of books uniformly bound. They followed the shape of the room, terminating at the lower part in huge divans, covered with brown leather, which were curved, to afford the greatest comfort. Light movable desks, made to slide in and out at will, allowed one to rest one's book while reading. In the centre stood an immense table, covered with pamphlets, amongst which were some newspapers, already of old date. The electric light flooded everything; it was shed from four unpolished globes half sunk in the volutes of the ceiling. I looked with real admiration at this room, so ingeniously fitted up, and I could scarcely believe my eyes.
"Captain Nemo," said I to my host, who had just thrown himself on one of the divans, "this is a library which would do honour to more than one of the continental palaces, and I am absolutely astounded when I consider that it can follow you to the bottom of the seas." "Where could one find greater solitude or silence, Professor?" replied Captain Nemo. "Did your study in the Museum afford you such perfect quiet?"
"No, sir; and I must confess that it is a very poor one after yours. You must have six or seven thousand volumes here." "Twelve thousand, M. Aronnax. These are the only ties which bind me to the earth. But I had done with the world on the day when my Nautilus plunged for the first time beneath the waters. That day I bought my last volumes, my last pamphlets, my last papers, and from that time I wish to think that men no longer think or write. These books, Professor, are at your service besides, and you can make use of them freely."
I thanked Captain Nemo, and went up to the shelves of the library. Works on science, morals, and literature abounded in every language; but I did not see one single work on political economy; that subject appeared to be strictly proscribed. Strange to say, all these books were irregularly arranged, in whatever language they were written; and this medley proved that the Captain of the Nautilus must have read indiscriminately the books which he took up by chance. "Sir," said I to the Captain, "I thank you for having placed this library at my disposal. It contains treasures of science, and I shall profit by them."
"This room is not only a library," said Captain Nemo, "it is also a smoking-room."
"A smoking-room!" I cried. "Then one may smoke on board?"
"Certainly."
"Then, sir, I am forced to believe that you have kept up a communication with Havannah."
"Not any," answered the Captain. "Accept this cigar, M. Aronnax; and, though it does not come from Havannah, you will be pleased with it, if you are a connoisseur."
I took the cigar which was offered me; its shape recalled the London ones, but it seemed to be made of leaves of gold. I lighted it at a little brazier, which was supported upon an elegant bronze stem, and drew the first whiffs with the delight of a lover of smoking who has not smoked for two days.
"It is excellent, but it is not tobacco."
"No!" answered the Captain, "this tobacco comes neither from Havannah nor from the East. It is a kind of sea-weed, rich in nicotine, with which the sea provides me, but somewhat sparingly." At that moment Captain Nemo opened a door which stood opposite to that by which I had entered the library, and I passed into an immense drawing-room splendidly lighted.
It was a vast four-sided room, thirty feet long, eighteen wide, and fifteen high. A luminous ceiling, decorated with light arabesques, shed a soft clear light over all the marvels accumulated in this museum. For it was in fact a museum, in which an intelligent and prodigal hand had gathered all the treasures of nature and art, with the artistic confusion which distinguishes a painter's studio. Thirty first-rate pictures, uniformly framed, separated by bright drapery, ornamented the walls, which were hung with tapestry of severe design. I saw works of great value, the greater part of which I had admired in the special collections of Europe, and in the exhibitions of paintings. The several schools of the old masters were represented by a Madonna of Raphael, a Virgin of Leonardo da Vinci, a nymph of Corregio, a woman of Titan, an Adoration of Veronese, an Assumption of Murillo, a portrait of Holbein, a monk of Velasquez, a martyr of Ribera, a fair of Rubens, two Flemish landscapes of Teniers, three little "genre" pictures of Gerard Dow, Metsu, and Paul Potter, two specimens of Géricault and Prudhon, and some sea-pieces of Backhuysen and Vernet. Amongst the works of modern painters were pictures with the signatures of Delacroix, Ingres, Decamps, Troyon, Meissonier, Daubigny, etc.; and some admirable statues in marble and bronze, after the finest antique models, stood upon pedestals in the corners of this magnificent museum. Amazement, as the Captain of the Nautilus had predicted, had already begun to take possession of me.
"Professor," said this strange man, "you must excuse the unceremonious way in which I receive you, and the disorder of this room." "Sir," I answered, "without seeking to know who you are, I recognise in you an artist."
"An amateur, nothing more, sir. Formerly I loved to collect these beautiful works created by the hand of man. I sought them greedily, and ferreted them out indefatigably, and I have been able to bring together some objects of great value. These are my last souvenirs of that world which is dead to me. In my eyes, your modern artists are already old; they have two or three thousand years of existence; I confound them in my own mind. Masters have no age."
"And these musicians?" said I, pointing out some works of Weber, Rossini, Mozart, Beethoven, Haydn, Meyerbeer, Hérold, Wagner, Auber, Gounod, and a number of others, scattered over a large model piano-organ which occupied one of the panels of the drawing-room. "These musicians," replied Captain Nemo, "are the contemporaries of Orpheus; for in the memory of the dead all chronological differences are effaced; and I am dead, Professor; as much dead as those of your friends who are sleeping six feet under the earth!" Captain Nemo was silent, and seemed lost in a profound reverie. I contemplated him with deep interest, analysing in silence the strange expression of his countenance. Leaning on his elbow against an angle of a costly mosaic table, he no longer saw me,-he had forgotten my presence.
I did not disturb this reverie, and continued my observation of the curiosities which enriched this drawing-room.
Under elegant glass cases, fixed by copper rivets, were classed and labelled the most precious productions of the sea which had ever been presented to the eye of a naturalist. My delight as a professor may be conceived.
The division containing the zoophytes presented the most curious specimens of the two groups of polypi and echinodermes. In the first group, the tubipores, were gorgones arranged like a fan, soft sponges of Syria, ises of the Moluccas, pennatules, an admirable virgularia of the Norwegian seas, variegated unbellulairæ, alcyonariæ, a whole series of madrepores, which my master Milne Edwards has so cleverly classified, amongst which I remarked some wonderful flabellinæ oculinæ of the Island of Bourbon, the "Neptune's car" of the Antilles, superb varieties of corals-in short, every species of those curious polypi of which entire islands are formed, which will one day become continents. Of the echinodermes, remarkable for their coating of spines, asteri, sea-stars, pantacrinæ, comatules, astérophons, echini, holothuri, etc., represented individually a complete collection of this group. A somewhat nervous conchyliologist would certainly have fainted before other more numerous cases, in which were classified the specimens of molluscs. It was a collection of inestimable value, which time fails me to describe minutely. Amongst these specimens I will quote from memory only the elegant royal hammer-fish of the Indian Ocean, whose regular white spots stood out brightly on a red and brown ground, an imperial spondyle, bright-coloured, bristling with spines, a rare specimen in the European museums-(I estimated its value at not less than £1000); a common hammer-fish of the seas of New Holland, which is only procured with difficulty; exotic buccardia of Senegal; fragile white bivalve shells, which a breath might shatter like a soap-bubble; several varieties of the aspirgillum of Java, a kind of calcareous tube, edged with leafy folds, and much debated by amateurs; a whole series of trochi, some a greenish-yellow, found in the American seas, others a reddish-brown, natives of Australian waters; others from the Gulf of Mexico, remarkable for their imbricated shell; stellari found in the Southern Seas; and last, the rarest of all, the magnificent spur of New Zealand; and every description of delicate and fragile shells to which science has given appropriate names.
Apart, in separate compartments, were spread out chaplets of pearls of the greatest beauty, which reflected the electric light in little sparks of fire; pink pearls, torn from the pinna-marina of the Red Sea; green pearls of the haliotyde iris; yellow, blue and black pearls, the curious productions of the divers molluscs of every ocean, and certain mussels of the water-courses of the North; lastly, several specimens of inestimable value which had been gathered from the rarest pintadines. Some of these pearls were larger than a pigeon's egg, and were worth as much, and more than that which the traveller Tavernier sold to the Shah of Persia for three millions, and surpassed the one in the possession of the Imaum of Muscat, which I had believed to be unrivalled in the world.
Therefore, to estimate the value of this collection was simply impossible. Captain Nemo must have expended millions in the acquirement of these various specimens, and I was thinking what source he could have drawn from, to have been able thus to gratify his fancy for collecting, when I was interrupted by these words- "You are examining my shells, Professor? Unquestionably they must be interesting to a naturalist; but for me they have a far greater charm, for I have collected them all with my own hand, and there is not a sea on the face of the globe which has escaped my researches." "I can understand, Captain, the delight of wandering about in the midst of such riches. You are one of those who have collected their treasures themselves. No museum in Europe possesses such a collection of the produce of the ocean. But if I exhaust all my admiration upon it, I shall have none left for the vessel which carries it. I do not wish to pry into your secrets; but I must confess that this Nautilus, with the motive power which is confined in it, the contrivances which enable it to be worked, the powerful agent which propels it, all excite my curiosity to the highest pitch. I see suspended on the walls of this room instruments of whose use I am ignorant."
"You will find these same instruments in my own room, Professor, where I shall have much pleasure in explaining their use to you. But first come and inspect the cabin which is set apart for your own use. You must see how you will be accommodated on board the Nautilus." I followed Captain Nemo, who, by one of the doors opening from each panel of the drawing-room, regained the waist. He conducted me towards the bow, and there I found, not a cabin, but an elegant room, with a bed, dressing-table, and several other pieces of furniture.
I could only thank my host.
"Your room adjoins mine," said he, opening a door, "and mine opens into the drawing-room that we have just quitted."
I entered the Captain's room: it had a severe, almost a monkish, aspect. A small iron bedstead, a table, some articles for the toilet; the whole lighted by a skylight. No comforts, the strictest necessaries only.
Captain Nemo pointed to a seat.
"Be so good as to sit down," he said. I seated myself, and he began thus:
"Sir," said Captain Nemo, showing me the instruments hanging on the walls of his room, "here are the contrivances required for the navigation of the Nautilus. Here, as in the drawing-room, I have them always under my eyes, and they indicate my position and exact direction in the middle of the ocean. Some are known to you, such as the thermometer, which gives the internal temperature of the _Nautilus;_ the barometer, which indicates the weight of the air and foretells the changes of the weather; the hygrometer, which marks the dryness of the atmosphere; the storm-glass, the contents of which, by decomposing, announce the approach of tempests; the compass, which guides my course; the sextant, which shows the latitude by the altitude of the sun; chronometers, by which I calculate the longitude; and glasses for day and night, which I use to examine the points of the horizon, when the Nautilus rises to the surface of the waves."
"These are the usual nautical instruments," I replied, "and I know the use of them. But these others, no doubt, answer to the particular requirements of the Nautilus. This dial with the movable needle is a manometer, is it not?"
"It is actually a manometer. But by communication with the water, whose external pressure it indicates, it gives our depth at the same time." "And these other instruments, the use of which I cannot guess?" "Here, Professor, I ought to give you some explanations. Will you be kind enough to listen to me?"
He was silent for a few moments, then he said-
"There is a powerful agent, obedient, rapid, easy, which conforms to every use, and reigns supreme on board my vessel. Everything is done by means of it. It lights it, warms it, and is the soul of my mechanical apparatus. This agent is electricity."
"Electricity?" I cried in surprise.
"Yes, sir."
"Nevertheless, Captain, you possess an extreme rapidity of movement, which does not agree with the power of electricity. Until now, its dynamic force has remained under restraint, and has only been able to produce a small amount of power."
"Professor," said Captain Nemo, "my electricity is not everybody's. You know what sea-water is composed of. In a thousand grammes are found 96½ per cent. of water, and about 2-2/3 per cent. of chloride of sodium; then, in a smaller quantity, chlorides of magnesium and of potassium, bromide of magnesium, sulphate of magnesia, sulphate and carbonate of lime. You see, then, that chloride of sodium forms a large part of it. So it is this sodium that I extract from sea-water, and of which I compose my ingredients. I owe all to the ocean; it produces electricity, and electricity gives heat, light, motion, and, in a word, life to the Nautilus."
"But not the air you breathe?"
"Oh! I could manufacture the air necessary for my consumption, but it is useless, because I go up to the surface of the water when I please. However, if electricity does not furnish me with air to breathe, it works at least the powerful pumps that are stored in spacious reservoirs, and which enable me to prolong at need, and as long as I will, my stay in the depths of the sea. It gives a uniform and unintermittent light, which the sun does not. Now look at this clock; it is electrical, and goes with a regularity that defies the best chronometers. I have divided it into twenty-four hours, like the Italian clocks, because for me there is neither night nor day, sun nor moon, but only that factitious light that I take with me to the bottom of the sea. Look! just now, it is ten o'clock in the morning."
"Exactly."
"Another application of electricity. This dial hanging in front of us indicates the speed of the Nautilus. An electric thread puts it in communication with the screw, and the needle indicates the real speed. Look! now we are spinning along with a uniform speed of fifteen miles an hour."
"It is marvelous! And I see, Captain, you were right to make use of this agent that takes the place of wind, water, and steam." "We have not finished, M. Aronnax," said Captain Nemo, rising. "If you will follow me, we will examine the stern of the Nautilus." Really, I knew already the anterior part of this submarine boat, of which this is the exact division, starting from the ship's head:-the dining-room, five yards long, separated from the library by a water-tight partition; the library, five yards long; the large drawing-room, ten yards long, separated from the Captain's room by a second water-tight partition; the said room, five yards in length; mine, two and a half yards; and, lastly a reservoir of air, seven and a half yards, that extended to the bows. Total length thirty five yards, or one hundred and five feet. The partitions had doors that were shut hermetically by means of india-rubber instruments, and they ensured the safety of the Nautilus in case of a leak.
I followed Captain Nemo through the waist, and arrived at the centre of the boat. There was a sort of well that opened between two partitions. An iron ladder, fastened with an iron hook to the partition, led to the upper end. I asked the Captain what the ladder was used for. "It leads to the small boat," he said.
"What! have you a boat?" I exclaimed, in surprise. "Of course; an excellent vessel, light and insubmersible, that serves either as a fishing or as a pleasure boat."
"But then, when you wish to embark, you are obliged to come to the surface of the water?"
"Not at all. This boat is attached to the upper part of the hull of the Nautilus, and occupies a cavity made for it. It is decked, quite water-tight, and held together by solid bolts. This ladder leads to a man-hole made in the hull of the Nautilus, that corresponds with a similar hole made in the side of the boat. By this double opening I get into the small vessel. They shut the one belonging to the _Nautilus;_ I shut the other by means of screw pressure. I undo the bolts, and the little boat goes up to the surface of the sea with prodigious rapidity. I then open the panel of the bridge, carefully shut till then; I mast it, hoist my sail, take my oars, and I'm off."
"But how do you get back on board?"
"I do not come back, M. Aronnax; the Nautilus comes to me."
"By your orders?"
"By my orders. An electric thread connects us. I telegraph to it, and that is enough."
"Really," I said, astonished at these marvels, "nothing can be more simple."
After having passed by the cage of the staircase that led to the platform, I saw a cabin six feet long, in which Conseil and Ned Land, enchanted with their repast, were devouring it with avidity. Then a door opened into a kitchen nine feet long, situated between the large storerooms. There electricity, better than gas itself, did all the cooking. The streams under the furnaces gave out to the sponges of platina a heat which was regularly kept up and distributed. They also heated a distilling apparatus, which, by evaporation, furnished excellent drinkable water. Near this kitchen was a bathroom comfortably furnished, with hot and cold water taps.
Next to the kitchen was the berthroom of the vessel, sixteen feet long. But the door was shut, and I could not see the management of it, which might have given me an idea of the number of men employed on board the
At the bottom was a fourth partition that separated this office from the engine-room. A door opened, and I found myself in the compartment where Captain Nemo-certainly an engineer of a very high order-had arranged his locomotive machinery. This engine-room, clearly lighted, did not measure less than sixty-five feet in length. It was divided into two parts; the first contained the materials for producing electricity, and the second the machinery that connected it with the screw. I examined it with great interest, in order to understand the machinery of the Nautilus.
"You see," said the Captain, "I use Bunsen's contrivances, not Ruhmkorff's. Those would not have been powerful enough. Bunsen's are fewer in number, but strong and large, which experience proves to be the best. The electricity produced passes forward, where it works, by electro-magnets of great size, on a system of levers and cog-wheels that transmit the movement to the axle of the screw. This one, the diameter of which is nineteen feet, and the thread twenty-three feet, performs about a hundred and twenty revolutions in a second."
"And you get then?"
"A speed of fifty miles an hour."
"I have seen the Nautilus manœuvre before the _Abraham Lincoln_, and I have my own ideas as to its speed. But this is not enough. We must see where we go. We must be able to direct it to the right, to the left, above, below. How do you get to the great depths, where you find an increasing resistance, which is rated by hundreds of atmospheres? How do you return to the surface of the ocean? And how do you maintain yourselves in the requisite medium? Am I asking too much?" "Not at all, Professor," replied the Captain, with some hesitation; "since you may never leave this submarine boat. Come into the saloon, it is our usual study, and there you will learn all you want to know about the Nautilus."
A moment after we were seated on a divan in the saloon smoking. The Captain showed me a sketch that gave the plan, section, and elevation of the Nautilus. Then he began his description in these words:- "Here, M. Aronnax, are the several dimensions of the boat you are in. It is an elongated cylinder with conical ends. It is very like a cigar in shape, a shape already adopted in London in several constructions of the same sort. The length of this cylinder, from stem to stern, is exactly 232 feet, and its maximum breadth is twenty-six feet. It is not built quite like your long-voyage steamers, but its lines are sufficiently long, and its curves prolonged enough, to allow the water to slide off easily, and oppose no obstacle to its passage. These two dimensions enable you to obtain by a simple calculation the surface and cubic contents of the Nautilus. Its area measures 6032 feet; and its contents about 1500 cubic yards-that is to say, when completely immersed it displaces 50,000 feet of water, or weighs 1500 tons. "When I made the plans for this submarine vessel, I meant that nine-tenths should be submerged: consequently, it ought only to displace nine-tenths of its bulk-that is to say, only to weigh that number of tons. I ought not, therefore, to have exceeded that weight, constructing it on the aforesaid dimensions.
"The Nautilus is composed of two hulls, one inside, the other outside, joined by T-shaped irons, which render it very strong. Indeed, owing to this cellular arrangement it resists like a block, as if it were solid. Its sides cannot yield; it coheres spontaneously, and not by the closeness of its rivets; and the homogenity of its construction, due to the perfect union of the materials, enables it to defy the roughest seas.
"These two hulls are composed of steel plates, whose density is from .7 to .8 that of water. The first is not less than two inches and a half thick and weighs 394 tons. The second envelope, the keel, twenty inches high and ten thick, weighs alone sixty-two tons. The engine, the ballast, the several accessories and apparatus appendages, the partitions and bulkheads, weigh 961.62 tons. Do you follow all this?"
"I do."
"Then, when the Nautilus is afloat under these circumstances, one-tenth is out of the water. Now, if I have made reservoirs of a size equal to this tenth, or capable of holding 150 tons, and if I fill them with water, the boat, weighing then 1507 tons, will be completely immersed. That would happen, Professor. These reservoirs are in the lower parts of the Nautilus. I turn on taps and they fill, and the vessel sinks that had just been level with the surface." "Well, Captain, but now we come to the real difficulty. I can understand your rising to the surface; but diving below the surface, does not your submarine contrivance encounter a pressure, and consequently undergo an upward thrust of one atmosphere for every thirty feet of water, just about fifteen pounds per square inch?"
"Just so, sir."
"Then, unless you quite fill the Nautilus, I do not see how you can draw it down to those depths."
"Professor, you must not confound statics with dynamics or you will be exposed to grave errors. There is very little labour spent in attaining the lower regions of the ocean, for all bodies have a tendency to sink. When I wanted to find out the necessary increase of weight required to sink the Nautilus, I had only to calculate the reduction of volume that sea-water acquires according to the depth."
"That is evident."
"Now, if water is not absolutely incompressible, it is at least capable of very slight compression. Indeed, after the most recent calculations this reduction is only .000436 of an atmosphere for each thirty feet of depth. If we want to sink 3000 feet, I should keep account of the reduction of bulk under a pressure equal to that of a column of water of a thousand feet. The calculation is easily verified. Now, I have supplementary reservoirs capable of holding a hundred tons. Therefore I can sink to a considerable depth. When I wish to rise to the level of the sea, I only let off the water, and empty all the reservoirs if I want the Nautilus to emerge from the tenth part of her total capacity."
I had nothing to object to these reasonings.
"I admit your calculations, Captain," I replied; "I should be wrong to dispute them since daily experience confirms them; but I foresee a real difficulty in the way."
"What, sir?"
"When you are about 1000 feet deep, the walls of the Nautilus bear a pressure of 100 atmospheres. If, then, just now you were to empty the supplementary reservoirs, to lighten the vessel, and to go up to the surface, the pumps must overcome the pressure of 100 atmospheres, which is 1500 pounds per square inch. From that a power--" "That electricity alone can give," said the Captain, hastily. "I repeat, sir, that the dynamic power of my engines is almost infinite. The pumps of the Nautilus have an enormous power, as you must have observed when their jets of water burst like a torrent upon the _Abraham Lincoln_. Besides I use subsidiary reservoirs only to attain a mean depth of 750 to 1000 fathoms, and that with a view of managing my machines. Also, when I have a mind to visit the depths of the ocean five or six miles below the surface, I make use of slower but not less infallible means."
"What are they, Captain?"
"That involves my telling you how the Nautilus is worked."
"I am impatient to learn."
"To steer this boat to starboard or port, to turn-in a word, following a horizontal plan, I use an ordinary rudder fixed on the back of the stern-post, and with one wheel and some tackle to steer by. But I can also make the Nautilus rise and sink, and sink and rise, by a vertical movement by means of two inclined planes fastened to its sides, opposite the centre of flotation, planes that move in every direction, and that are worked by powerful levers from the interior. If the planes are kept parallel with the boat, it moves horizontally. If slanted, the Nautilus, according to this inclination, and under the influence of the screw, either sinks diagonally or rises diagonally as it suits me. And even if I wish to rise more quickly to the surface, I ship the screw, and the pressure of the water causes the Nautilus to rise vertically like a balloon filled with hydrogen." "Bravo, Captain! But how can the steersman follow the route in the middle of the waters?"
"The steersman is placed in a glazed box, that is raised about the hull of the Nautilus, and furnished with lenses."
"Are these lenses capable of resisting such pressure?" "Perfectly. Glass, which breaks at a blow, is, nevertheless, capable of offering considerable resistance. During some experiments of fishing by electric light in 1864 in the Northern Seas, we saw plates less than a third of an inch thick resist a pressure of sixteen atmospheres. Now, the glass that I use is not less than thirty times thicker." "Granted. But, after all, in order to see, the light must exceed the darkness, and in the midst of the darkness in the water, how can you see?"
"Behind the steersman's cage is placed a powerful electric reflector, the rays from which light up the sea for half a mile in front." "Ah! bravo, bravo, Captain! Now I can account for this phosphorescence in the supposed narwhal that puzzled us so. I now ask you if the boarding of the Nautilus and of the _Scotia_, that has made such a noise, has been the result of a chance rencontre?" "Quite accidental, sir. I was sailing only one fathom below the surface of the water, when the shock came. It had no bad result." "None, sir. But now, about your rencontre with the _Abraham Lincoln?_" "Professor, I am sorry for one of the best vessels in the American navy; but they attacked me, and I was bound to defend myself. I contented myself, however, with putting the frigate _hors de combat;_ she will not have any difficulty in getting repaired at the next port." "Ah, Commander! your Nautilus is certainly a marvellous boat." "Yes, Professor; and I love it as if it were part of myself. If danger threatens one of your vessels on the ocean, the first impression is the feeling of an abyss above and below. On the Nautilus men's hearts never fail them. No defects to be afraid of, for the double shell is as firm as iron; no rigging to attend to; no sails for the wind to carry away; no boilers to burst; no fire to fear, for the vessel is made of iron, not of wood; no coal to run short, for electricity is the only mechanical agent; no collision to fear, for it alone swims in deep water; no tempest to brave, for when it dives below the water, it reaches absolute tranquillity. There, sir! that is the perfection of vessels! And if it is true that the engineer has more confidence in the vessel than the builder, and the builder than the captain himself, you understand the trust I repose in my _Nautilus;_ for I am at once captain, builder, and engineer."
"But how could you construct this wonderful Nautilus in secret?" "Each separate portion, M. Aronnax, was brought from different parts of the globe. The keel was forged at Creusot, the shaft of the screw at Penn & Co.'s, London, the iron plates of the hull at Laird's of Liverpool, the screw itself at Scott's at Glasgow. The reservoirs were made by Cail & Co. at Paris, the engine by Krupp in Prussia, its beak in Motala's workshop in Sweden, its mathematical instruments by Hart Brothers, of New York, etc.; and each of these people had my orders under different names."
"But these parts had to be put together and arranged?" "Professor, I had set up my workshops upon a desert island in the ocean. There my workmen, that is to say, the brave men that I instructed and educated, and myself have put together our Nautilus. Then when the work was finished, fire destroyed all trace of our proceedings on this island, that I could have jumped over if I had liked."
"Then the cost of this vessel is great?"
"M. Aronnax, an iron vessel costs £145 per ton. Now the Nautilus weighed 1500. It came therefore to £67,500, and £80,000 more for fitting it up, and about £200,000 with the works of art and the collections it contains."
"One last question, Captain Nemo."
"Ask it, Professor."
"You are rich?"
"Immensely rich, sir; and I could, without missing it, pay the national debt of France."
I stared at the singular person who spoke thus. Was he playing upon my credulity? The future would decide that.
The portion of the terrestrial globe which is covered by water is estimated at upwards of eighty millions of acres. This fluid mass comprises two billions two hundred and fifty millions of cubic miles, forming a spherical body of a diameter of sixty leagues, the weight of which would be three quintillions of tons. To comprehend the meaning of these figures, it is necessary to observe that a quintillion is to a billion as a billion is to unity; in other words, there are as many billions in a quintillion as there are units in a billion. This mass of fluid is equal to about the quantity of water which would be discharged by all the rivers of the earth in forty thousand years. During the geological epochs, the igneous period succeeded to the aqeous. The ocean originally prevailed everywhere. Then by degrees, in the silurian period, the tops of the mountains began to appear, the islands emerged, then disappeared in partial deluges, reappeared, became settled, formed continents, till at length the earth became geographically arranged, as we see in the present day. The solid had wrested from the liquid thirty-seven million six hundred and fifty-seven square miles, equal to twelve billion nine hundred and sixty millions of acres.
The shape of continents allows us to divide the waters into five great portions: the Arctic or Frozen Ocean, the Antarctic or Frozen Ocean, the Indian, the Atlantic, and the Pacific Oceans. The Pacific Ocean extends from north to south between the two polar circles, and from east to west between Asia and America, over an extent of 145 degrees of longitude. It is the quietest of seas; its currents are broad and slow, it has medium tides, and abundant rain. Such was the ocean that my fate destined me first to travel over under these strange conditions.
"Sir," said Captain Nemo, "we will, if you please, take our bearings and fix the starting-point of this voyage. It is a quarter to twelve; I will go up again to the surface."
The Captain pressed an electric clock three times. The pumps began to drive the water from the tanks; the needle of the manometer marked by a different pressure the ascent of the Nautilus, then it stopped. "We have arrived," said the Captain.
I went to the central staircase which opened on to the platform, clambered up the iron steps, and found myself on the upper part of the Nautilus.
The platform was only three feet out of water. The front and back of the Nautilus was of that spindle-shape which caused it justly to be compared to a cigar. I noticed that its iron plates, slightly overlaying each other, resembled the shell which clothes the bodies of our large terrestrial reptiles. It explained to me how natural it was, in spite of all glasses, that this boat should have been taken for a marine animal.
Toward the middle of the platform the long-boat, half buried in the hull of the vessel, formed a slight excrescence. Fore and aft rose two cages of medium height with inclined sides, and partly closed by thick lenticular glasses; one destined for the steersman who directed the Nautilus, the other containing a brilliant lantern to give light on the road.
The sea was beautiful, the sky pure. Scarcely could the long vehicle feel the broad undulations of the ocean. A light breeze from the east rippled the surface of the waters. The horizon, free from fog, made observation easy. Nothing was in sight. Not a quicksand, not an island.
A vast desert.
Captain Nemo, by the help of his sextant, took the altitude of the sun, which ought also to give the latitude. He waited for some moments till its disc touched the horizon. Whilst taking observations not a muscle moved, the instrument could not have been more motionless in a hand of marble.
[Illustration] Captain Nemo took the Sun's altitude "Twelve o'clock, sir," said he. "When you like--" I cast a last look upon the sea, slightly yellowed by the Japanese coast, and descended to the saloon.
"And now, sir, I leave you to your studies," added the Captain; "our course is E.N.E., our depth is twenty-six fathoms. Here are maps on a large scale by which you may follow it. The saloon is at your disposal, and with your permission, I will retire." Captain Nemo bowed, and I remained alone, lost in thoughts all bearing on the commander of the Nautilus.
For a whole hour was I deep in these reflections, seeking to pierce this mystery so interesting to me. Then my eyes fell upon the vast planisphere spread upon the table, and I placed my finger on the very spot where the given latitude and longitude crossed. The sea has its large rivers like the continents. They are special currents known by their temperature and their colour. The most remarkable of these is known by the name of the Gulf Stream. Science has decided on the globe the direction of five principal currents: one in the North Atlantic, a second in the South, a third in the North Pacific, a fourth in the South, and a fifth in the Southern Indian Ocean. It is even probable that a sixth current existed at one time or another in the Northern Indian Ocean, when the Caspian and Aral Seas formed but one vast sheet of water.
At this point indicated on the planisphere one of these currents was rolling, the Kuro-Scivo of the Japanese, the Black River, which, leaving the Gulf of Bengal, where it is warmed by the perpendicular rays of a tropical sun, crosses the Straits of Malacca along the coast of Asia, turns into the North Pacific to the Aleutian Islands, carrying with it trunks of camphor-trees and other indigenous productions, and edging the waves of the ocean with the pure indigo of its warm water. It was this current that the Nautilus was to follow. I followed it with my eye; saw it lose itself in the vastness of the Pacific, and felt myself drawn with it, when Ned Land and Conseil appeared at the door of the saloon.
My two brave companions remained petrified at the sight of the wonders spread before them.
"Where are we, where are we?" exclaimed the Canadian. "In the museum at
Quebec?"
"My friends," I answered, making a sign for them to enter, "you are not in Canada, but on board the Nautilus, fifty yards below the level of the sea."
"But, M. Aronnax," said Ned Land, "can you tell me how many men there are on board? Ten, twenty, fifty, a hundred?"
"I cannot answer you, Mr. Land; it is better to abandon for a time all idea of seizing the Nautilus or escaping from it. This ship is a masterpiece of modern industry, and I should be sorry not to have seen it. Many people would accept the situation forced upon us, if only to move amongst such wonders. So be quiet and let us try and see what passes around us."
"See!" exclaimed the harpooner, "but we can see nothing in this iron prison! We are walking-we are sailing-blindly."
Ned Land had scarcely pronounced these words when all was suddenly darkness. The luminous ceiling was gone, and so rapidly that my eyes received a painful impression.
We remained mute, not stirring, and not knowing what surprise awaited us, whether agreeable or disagreeable. A sliding noise was heard: one would have said that panels were working at the sides of the Nautilus.
"It is the end of the end!" said Ned Land.
Suddenly light broke at each side of the saloon, through two oblong openings. The liquid mass appeared vividly lit up by the electric gleam. Two crystal plates separated us from the sea. At first I trembled at the thought that this frail partition might break, but strong bands of copper bound them, giving an almost infinite power of resistance.
The sea was distinctly visible for a mile all round the Nautilus. What a spectacle! What pen can describe it? Who could paint the effects of the light through those transparent sheets of water, and the softness of the successive gradations from the lower to the superior strata of the ocean?
We know the transparency of the sea and that its clearness is far beyond that of rock-water. The mineral and organic substances which it holds in suspension heightens its transparency. In certain parts of the ocean at the Antilles, under seventy-five fathoms of water, can be seen with surprising clearness a bed of sand. The penetrating power of the solar rays does not seem to cease for a depth of one hundred and fifty fathoms. But in this middle fluid travelled over by the Nautilus, the electric brightness was produced even in the bosom of the waves. It was no longer luminous water, but liquid light.
On each side a window opened into this unexplored abyss. The obscurity of the saloon showed to advantage the brightness outside, and we looked out as if this pure crystal had been the glass of an immense aquarium. "You wished to see, friend Ned; well, you see now." "Curious! curious!" muttered the Canadian, who, forgetting his ill-temper, seemed to submit to some irresistible attraction; "and one would come further than this to admire such a sight!" "Ah!" thought I to myself, "I understand the life of this man; he has made a world apart for himself, in which he treasures all his greatest wonders."
For two whole hours an aquatic army escorted the Nautilus. During their games, their bounds, while rivalling each other in beauty, brightness, and velocity, I distinguished the green labre; the banded mullet, marked by a double line of black; the round-tailed goby, of a white colour, with violet spots on the back; the Japanese scombrus, a beautiful mackerel of those seas, with a blue body and silvery head; the brilliant azurors, whose name alone defies description; some banded spares, with variegated fins of blue and yellow; the woodcocks of the seas, some specimens of which attain a yard in length; Japanese salamanders, spider lampreys, serpents six feet long, with eyes small and lively, and a huge mouth bristling with teeth; with many other species.
Our imagination was kept at its height, interjections followed quickly on each other. Ned named the fish, and Conseil classed them. I was in ecstasies with the vivacity of their movements and the beauty of their forms. Never had it been given to me to surprise these animals, alive and at liberty, in their natural element. I will not mention all the varieties which passed before my dazzled eyes, all the collection of the seas of China and Japan. These fish, more numerous than the birds of the air, came, attracted, no doubt, by the brilliant focus of the electric light.
Suddenly there was daylight in the saloon, the iron panels closed again, and the enchanting vision disappeared. But for a long time I dreamt on till my eyes fell on the instruments hanging on the partition. The compass still showed the course to be E.N.E., the manometer indicated a pressure of five atmospheres, equivalent to a depth of twenty-five fathoms, and the electric log gave a speed of fifteen miles an hour. I expected Captain Nemo, but he did not appear. The clock marked the hour of five.
Ned Land and Conseil returned to their cabin, and I retired to my chamber. My dinner was ready. It was composed of turtle soup made of the most delicate hawksbills, of a surmullet served with puff paste (the liver of which, prepared by itself, was most delicious), and fillets of the emperor-holocanthus, the savour of which seemed to me superior even to salmon.
I passed the evening reading, writing, and thinking. Then sleep overpowered me, and I stretched myself on my couch of zostera, and slept profoundly, whilst the Nautilus was gliding rapidly through the current of the Black River.
The next day was the 9th of November. I awoke after a long sleep of twelve hours. Conseil came, according to custom, to know "how I had passed the night," and to offer his services. He had left his friend the Canadian sleeping like a man who had never done anything else all his life. I let the worthy fellow chatter as he pleased, without caring to answer him. I was pre-occupied by the absence of the Captain during our sitting of the day before, and hoping to see him to-day. As soon as I was dressed I went into the saloon. It was deserted. I plunged into the study of the shell treasures hidden behind the glasses. I revelled also in great herbals filled with the rarest marine plants, which, although dried up, retained their lovely colours. Amongst these precious hydrophytes I remarked some vorticellæ, pavonariæ, delicate ceramies with scarlet tints, some fan-shaped agari, and some natabuli like flat mushrooms, which at one time used to be classed as zoophytes; in short, a perfect series of algæ. The whole day passed without my being honoured by a visit from Captain Nemo. The panels of the saloon did not open. Perhaps they did not wish us to tire of these beautiful things.
The course of the Nautilus was E.N.E., her speed twelve knots, the depth below the surface between twenty-five and thirty fathoms. The next day, 10th of November, the same desertion, the same solitude. I did not see one of the ship's crew: Ned and Conseil spent the greater part of the day with me. They were astonished at the inexplicable absence of the Captain. Was this singular man ill?-had he altered his intentions with regard to us?
After all, as Conseil said, we enjoyed perfect liberty, we were delicately and abundantly fed. Our host kept to his terms of the treaty. We could not complain, and, indeed, the singularity of our fate reserved such wonderful compensation for us, that we had no right to accuse it as yet.
That day I commenced the journal of these adventures which has enabled me to relate them with more scrupulous exactitude and minute detail. I wrote it on paper made from the zostera marina.
11th November, early in the morning. The fresh air spreading over the interior of the Nautilus told me that we had come to the surface of the ocean to renew our supply of oxygen. I directed my steps to the central staircase, and mounted the platform.
It was six o'clock, the weather was cloudy, the sea grey but calm. Scarcely a billow. Captain Nemo, whom I hoped to meet, would he be there? I saw no one but the steersman imprisoned in his glass cage. Seated upon the projection formed by the hull of the pinnace, I inhaled the salt breeze with delight.
By degrees the fog disappeared under the action of the sun's rays, the radiant orb rose from behind the eastern horizon. The sea flamed under its glance like a train of gunpowder. The clouds scattered in the heights were coloured with lively tints of beautiful shades, and numerous "mare's tails," which betokened wind for that day. But what was wind to this Nautilus which tempests could not frighten! I was admiring this joyous rising of the sun, so gay, and so lifegiving, when I heard steps approaching the platform. I was prepared to salute Captain Nemo, but it was his second (whom I had already seen on the Captain's first visit) who appeared. He advanced on the platform, not seeming to see me. With his powerful glass to his eye he scanned every point of the horizon with great attention. This examination over, he approached the panel and pronounced a sentence in exactly these terms. I have remembered it, for every morning it was repeated under exactly the same conditions. It was thus worded-
"Nautron respoc lorni virch."
What it meant I could not say.
These words pronounced, the second descended. I thought that the Nautilus was about to return to its submarine navigation. I regained the panel and returned to my chamber.
Five days sped thus, without any change in our situation. Every morning I mounted the platform. The same phrase was pronounced by the same individual. But Captain Nemo did not appear.
I had made up my mind that I should never see him again, when, on the 16th November, on returning to my room with Ned and Conseil, I found upon my table a note addressed to me. I opened it impatiently. It was written in a bold, clear hand, the characters rather pointed, recalling the German type. The note was worded as follows-
16th of _November_, 1867.
TO PROFESSOR ARONNAX, On board the Nautilus.
Captain Nemo invites Professor Aronnax to a hunting-party, which will take place to-morrow morning in the forests of the island of Crespo. He hopes that nothing will prevent the Professor from being present, and he will with pleasure see him joined by his companions. CAPTAIN NEMO, Commander of the Nautilus.
"A hunt!" exclaimed Ned.
"And in the forests of the island of Crespo!" added Conseil. "Oh! then the gentleman is going on _terra firma?_" replied Ned Land. "That seems to me to be clearly indicated," said I, reading the letter once more.
"Well, we must accept," said the Canadian. "But once more on dry ground, we shall know what to do. Indeed, I shall not be sorry to eat a piece of fresh venison."
Without seeking to reconcile what was contradictory between Captain Nemo's manifest aversion to islands and continents, and his invitation to hunt in a forest, I contented myself with replying- "Let us first see where the island of Crespo is." I consulted the planisphere, and in 32° 40′ north lat. and 157° 50′ west long., I found a small island, recognised in 1801 by Captain Crespo, and marked in the ancient Spanish maps as Rocca de la Plata, the meaning of which is "The Silver Rock." We were then about eighteen hundred miles from our starting-point, and the course of the Nautilus, a little changed, was bringing it back towards the south-east.
I showed this little rock lost in the midst of the North Pacific to my companions.
"If Captain Nemo does sometimes go on dry ground," said I, "he at least chooses desert islands."
Ned Land shrugged his shoulders without speaking, and Conseil and he left me.
After supper, which was served by the steward mute and impassive, I went to bed, not without some anxiety.
The next morning, the 17th of November, on awakening, I felt that the Nautilus was perfectly still. I dressed quickly and entered the saloon.
Captain Nemo was there, waiting for me. He rose, bowed, and asked me if it was convenient for me to accompany him. As he made no allusion to his absence during the last eight days, I did not mention it, and simply answered that my companions and myself were ready to follow him. We entered the dining-room, where breakfast was served. "M. Aronnax," said the Captain, "pray, share my breakfast without ceremony; we will chat as we eat. For though I promised you a walk in the forest, I did not undertake to find hotels there. So breakfast as a man who will most likely not have his dinner till very late." I did honour to the repast. It was composed of several kinds of fish, and slices of holothuridæ (excellent zoophytes), and different sorts of sea-weed. Our drink consisted of pure water, to which the Captain added some drops of a fermented liquor, extracted by the Kamschatcha method from a sea-weed known under the name of _Rhodomenia palmata_. Captain Nemo ate at first without saying a word. Then he began- "Sir, when I proposed to you to hunt in my submarine forest of Crespo, you evidently thought me mad. Sir, you should never judge lightly of any man."
"But Captain, believe me--"
"Be kind enough to listen, and you will then see whether you have any cause to accuse me of folly and contradiction."
"I listen."
"You know as well as I do, Professor, that man can live under water, providing he carries with him a sufficient supply of breathable air. In submarine works, the workman, clad in an impervious dress, with his head in a metal helmet, receives air from above by means of forcing pumps and regulators."
"That is a diving apparatus," said I.
"Just so, but under these conditions the man is not at liberty; he is attached to the pump which sends him air through an india-rubber tube, and if we were obliged to be thus held to the Nautilus, we could not go far."
"And the means of getting free?" I asked.
"It is to use the Rouquayrol apparatus, invented by two of your own countrymen, which I have brought to perfection for my own use, and which will allow you to risk yourself under these new physiological conditions without any organ whatever suffering. It consists of a reservoir of thick iron plates, in which I store the air under a pressure of fifty atmospheres. This reservoir is fixed on the back by means of braces, like a soldier's knapsack. Its upper part forms a box in which the air is kept by means of a bellows, and therefore cannot escape unless at its normal tension. In the Rouquayrol apparatus such as we use, two india-rubber pipes leave this box and join a sort of tent which holds the nose and mouth; one is to introduce fresh air, the other to let out the foul, and the tongue closes one or the other according to the wants of the respirator. But I, in encountering great pressures at the bottom of the sea, was obliged to shut my head, like that of a diver in a ball of copper; and it is to this ball of copper that the two pipes, the inspirator and the expirator, open." "Perfectly, Captain Nemo; but the air that you carry with you must soon be used; when it only contains fifteen per cent. of oxygen it is no longer fit to breathe."
"Right! But I told you, M. Aronnax, that the pumps of the Nautilus allow me to store the air under considerable pressure, and on those conditions the reservoir of the apparatus can furnish breathable air for nine or ten hours."
"I have no further objections to make," I answered; "I will only ask you one thing, Captain-how can you light your road at the bottom of the sea?"
"With the Ruhmkorff apparatus, M. Aronnax; one is carried on the back, the other is fastened to the waist. It is composed of a Bunsen pile, which I do not work with bichromate of potash, but with sodium. A wire is introduced which collects the electricity produced, and directs it towards a particularly made lantern. In this lantern is a spiral glass which contains a small quantity of carbonic gas. When the apparatus is at work this gas becomes luminous, giving out a white and continuous light. Thus provided, I can breathe and I can see." "Captain Nemo, to all my objections you make such crushing answers, that I dare no longer doubt. But if I am forced to admit the Rouquayrol and Ruhmkorff apparatus, I must be allowed some reservations with regard to the gun I am to carry."
"But it is not a gun for powder," answered the Captain.
"Then it is an air-gun."
"Doubtless! How would you have me manufacture gunpowder on board, without either saltpetre, sulphur, or charcoal?"
"Besides," I added, "to fire under water in a medium eight hundred and fifty-five times denser than the air, we must conquer very considerable resistance."
"That would be no difficulty. There exist guns, according to Fulton, perfected in England by Philip Coles and Burley, in France by Furcy, and in Italy by Landi, which are furnished with a peculiar system of closing, which can fire under these conditions. But I repeat, having no powder, I use air under great pressure, which the pumps of the Nautilus furnish abundantly."
"But this air must be rapidly used?"
"Well, have I not my Rouquayrol reservoir, which can furnish it at need? A tap is all that is required. Besides, M. Aronnax, you must see yourself that, during our submarine hunt, we can spend but little air and but few balls."
"But it seems to me that in this twilight, and in the midst of this fluid, which is very dense compared with the atmosphere, shots could not go far, nor easily prove mortal."
"Sir, on the contrary, with this gun every blow is mortal; and however lightly the animal is touched, it falls as if struck by a thunderbolt."
"Why?"
"Because the balls sent by this gun are not ordinary balls, but little cases of glass (invented by Leniebroek, an Austrian chemist), of which I have a large supply. These glass cases are covered with a case of steel, and weighted with a pellet of lead; they are real Leyden bottles, into which the electricity is forced to a very high tension. With the slightest shock they are discharged, and the animal, however strong it may be, falls dead. I must tell you that these cases are size number four, and that the charge for an ordinary gun would be ten." "I will argue no longer," I replied, rising from the table; "I have nothing left me but to take my gun. At all events, I will go where you go."
Captain Nemo then led me aft; and in passing before Ned's and Conseil's cabin, I called my two companions, who followed immediately. We then came to a kind of cell near the machinery-room, in which we were to put on our walking-dress.
This cell was, to speak correctly, the arsenal and wardrobe of the Nautilus. A dozen diving apparatuses hung from the partition, waiting our use.
Ned Land, on seeing them, showed evident repugnance to dress himself in one.
"But, my worthy Ned, the forests of the Island of Crespo are nothing but submarine forests."
"Good!" said the disappointed harpooner, who saw his dreams of fresh meat fade away. "And you, M. Aronnax, are you going to dress yourself in those clothes?"
"There is no alternative, Master Ned."
"As you please, sir," replied the harpooner, shrugging his shoulders; "but as for me, unless I am forced, I will never get into one." "No one will force you, Master Ned," said Captain Nemo. "Is Conseil going to risk it?" asked Ned.
"I follow my master wherever he goes," replied Conseil. At the Captain's call two of the ship's crew came to help us to dress in these heavy and impervious clothes, made of india-rubber without seam, and constructed expressly to resist considerable pressure. One would have thought it a suit of armour, both supple and resisting. This suit formed trousers and waistcoat. The trousers were finished off with thick boots, weighted with heavy leaden soles. The texture of the waistcoat was held together by bands of copper, which crossed the chest, protecting it from the great pressure of the water, and leaving the lungs free to act; the sleeves ended in gloves, which in no way restrained the movement of the hands. There was a vast difference noticeable between these consummate apparatuses and the old cork breastplates, jackets, and other contrivances in vogue during the eighteenth century.
Captain Nemo and one of his companions (a sort of Hercules, who must have possessed great strength), Conseil, and myself, were soon enveloped in the dresses. There remained nothing more to be done but to enclose our heads in the metal box. But before proceeding to this operation, I asked the Captain's permission to examine the guns we were to carry.
One of the Nautilus men gave me a simple gun, the butt end of which, made of steel, hollow in the centre, was rather large. It served as a reservoir for compressed air, which a valve, worked by a spring, allowed to escape into a metal tube. A box of projectiles, in a groove in the thickness of the butt end, contained about twenty of these electric balls, which, by means of a spring, were forced into the barrel of the gun. As soon as one shot was fired, another was ready. "Captain Nemo," said I, "this arm is perfect, and easily handled: I only ask to be allowed to try it. But how shall we gain the bottom of the sea?"
"At this moment, Professor, the Nautilus is stranded in five fathoms, and we have nothing to do but to start."
"But how shall we get off?"
"You shall see."
Captain Nemo thrust his head into the helmet, Conseil and I did the same, not without hearing an ironical "Good sport!" from the Canadian. The upper part of our dress terminated in a copper collar upon which was screwed the metal helmet. Three holes, protected by thick glass, allowed us to see in all directions, by simply turning our head in the interior of the head-dress. As soon as it was in position, the Rouquayrol apparatus on our backs began to act; and, for my part, I
could breathe with ease.
With the Ruhmkorff lamp hanging from my belt, and the gun in my hand, I was ready to set out. But to speak the truth, imprisoned in these heavy garments, and glued to the deck by my leaden soles, it was impossible for me to take a step.
But this state of things was provided for. I felt myself being pushed into a little room contiguous to the wardrobe-room. My companions followed, towed along in the same way. I heard a water-tight door, furnished with stopper-plates, close upon us, and we were wrapped in profound darkness.
After some minutes, a loud hissing was heard. I felt the cold mount from my feet to my chest. Evidently from some part of the vessel they had, by means of a tap, given entrance to the water, which was invading us, and with which the room was soon filled. A second door cut in the side of the Nautilus then opened. We saw a faint light. In another instant our feet trod the bottom of the sea.
And now, how can I retrace the impression left upon me by that walk under the waters? Words are impotent to relate such wonders! Captain Nemo walked in front, his companion followed some steps behind. Conseil and I remained near each other, as if an exchange of words had been possible through our metallic cases. I no longer felt the weight of my clothing, or of my shoes, of my reservoir of air, or my thick helmet, in the midst of which my head rattled like an almond in its shell. The light, which lit the soil thirty feet below the surface of the ocean, astonished me by its power. The solar rays shone through the watery mass easily, and dissipated all colour, and I clearly distinguished objects at a distance of a hundred and fifty yards. Beyond that the tints darkened into fine gradations of ultramarine, and faded into vague obscurity. Truly this water which surrounded me was but another air denser than the terrestrial atmosphere, but almost as transparent. Above me was the calm surface of the sea. We were walking on fine, even sand, not wrinkled, as on a flat shore, which retains the impression of the billows. This dazzling carpet, really a reflector, repelled the rays of the sun with wonderful intensity, which accounted for the vibration which penetrated every atom of liquid. Shall I be believed when I say that, at the depth of thirty feet, I could see as if I was in broad daylight? For a quarter of an hour I trod on this sand, sown with the impalpable dust of shells. The hull of the Nautilus, resembling a long shoal, disappeared by degrees; but its lantern, when darkness should overtake us in the waters, would help to guide us on board by its distinct rays. Soon forms of objects outlined in the distance were discernible. I recognised magnificent rocks, hung with a tapestry of zoophytes of the most beautiful kind, and I was at first struck by the peculiar effect of this medium.
It was then ten in the morning; the rays of the sun struck the surface of the waves at rather an oblique angle, and at the touch of their light, decomposed by refraction as through a prism, flowers, rocks, plants, shells, and polypi were shaded at the edges by the seven solar colours. It was marvellous, a feast for the eyes, this complication of coloured tints, a perfect kaleidoscope of green, yellow, orange, violet, indigo, and blue; in one word, the whole palette of an enthusiastic colourist! Why could I not communicate to Conseil the lively sensations which were mounting to my brain, and rival him in expressions of admiration? For aught I knew, Captain Nemo and his companion might be able to exchange thoughts by means of signs previously agreed upon. So, for want of better, I talked to myself; I declaimed in the copper box which covered my head, thereby expending more air in vain words than was perhaps expedient. Various kinds of isis, clusters of pure tuft-coral, prickly fungi, and anemones formed a brilliant garden of flowers, enamelled with porphitæ, decked with their collarettes of blue tentacles, sea-stars studding the sandy bottom, together with asterophytons like fine lace embroidered by the hands of naïads, whose festoons were waved by the gentle undulations caused by our walk. It was a real grief to me to crush under my feet the brilliant specimens of molluscs which strewed the ground by thousands, of hammer-heads, donaciae (veritable bounding shells), of staircases, and red helmet-shells, angel-wings, and many others produced by this inexhaustible ocean. But we were bound to walk, so we went on, whilst above our heads waved shoals of physalides leaving their tentacles to float in their train, medusæ whose umbrellas of opal or rose-pink, escalloped with a band of blue, sheltered us from the rays of the sun and fiery pelagiæ, which, in the darkness, would have strewn our path with phosphorescent light.
All these wonders I saw in the space of a quarter of a mile, scarcely stopping, and following Captain Nemo, who beckoned me on by signs. Soon the nature of the soil changed; to the sandy plain succeeded an extent of slimy mud, which the Americans call "ooze," composed of equal parts of silicious and calcareous shells. We then travelled over a plain of sea-weed of wild and luxuriant vegetation. This sward was of close texture, and soft to the feet, and rivalled the softest carpet woven by the hand of man. But whilst verdure was spread at our feet, it did not abandon our heads. A light network of marine plants, of that inexhaustible family of sea-weeds of which more than two thousand kinds are known, grew on the surface of the water. I saw long ribbons of fucus floating, some globular, others tuberous; laurenciæ and cladostephi of most delicate foliage, and some rhodomeniæ palmatæ, resembling the fan of a cactus. I noticed that the green plants kept nearer the top of the sea, whilst the red were at a greater depth, leaving to the black or brown hydrophytes the care of forming gardens and parterres in the remote beds of the ocean.
We had quitted the Nautilus about an hour and a half. It was near noon; I knew by the perpendicularity of the sun's rays, which were no longer refracted. The magical colours disappeared by degrees, and the shades of emerald and sapphire were effaced. We walked with a regular step, which rang upon the ground with astonishing intensity; the slightest noise was transmitted with a quickness to which the ear is unaccustomed on the earth; indeed, water is a better conductor of sound than air, in the ratio of four to one. At this period the earth sloped downwards; the light took a uniform tint. We were at a depth of a hundred and five yards and twenty inches, undergoing a pressure of six atmospheres.
At this depth I could still see the rays of the sun, though feebly; to their intense brilliancy had succeeded a reddish twilight, the lowest state between day and night; but we could still see well enough; it was not necessary to resort to the Ruhmkorff apparatus as yet. At this moment Captain Nemo stopped; he waited till I joined him, and then pointed to an obscure mass, looming in the shadow, at a short distance. "It is the forest of the Island of Crespo," thought I;-and I was not mistaken.
We had at last arrived on the borders of this forest, doubtless one of the finest of Captain Nemo's immense domains. He looked upon it as his own, and considered he had the same right over it that the first men had in the first days of the world. And, indeed, who would have disputed with him the possession of this submarine property? What other hardier pioneer would come, hatchet in hand, to cut down the dark copses?
This forest was composed of large tree-plants; and the moment we penetrated under its vast arcades, I was struck by the singular position of their branches-a position I had not yet observed. Not a herb which carpeted the ground, not a branch which clothed the trees, was either broken or bent, nor did they extend horizontally; all stretched up to the surface of the ocean. Not a filament, not a ribbon, however thin they might be, but kept as straight as a rod of iron. The fuci and llianas grew in rigid perpendicular lines, due to the density of the element which had produced them. Motionless, yet when bent to one side by the hand, they directly resumed their former position. Truly it was the region of perpendicularity!
I soon accustomed myself to this fantastic position, as well as to the comparative darkness which surrounded us. The soil of the forest seemed covered with sharp blocks, difficult to avoid. The submarine flora struck me as being very perfect, and richer even than it would have been in the arctic or tropical zones, where these productions are not so plentiful. But for some minutes I involuntarily confounded the genera, taking zoophytes for hydrophytes, animals for plants; and who would not have been mistaken? The fauna and the flora are too closely allied in this submarine world.
These plants are self-propagated, and the principle of their existence is in the water, which upholds and nourishes them. The greater number, instead of leaves, shot forth blades of capricious shapes, comprised within a scale of colours,-pink, carmine, green, olive, fawn, and brown. I saw there (but not dried up, as our specimens of the Nautilus are) pavonari spread like a fan, as if to catch the breeze; scarlet ceramies, whose laminaries extended their edible shoots of fern-shaped nereocysti, which grow to a height of fifteen feet; clusters of acetabuli, whose stems increase in size upwards; and numbers of other marine plants, all devoid of flowers! "Curious anomaly, fantastic element!" said an ingenious naturalist, "in which the animal kingdom blossoms, and the vegetable does not!" Under these numerous shrubs (as large as trees of the temperate zone), and under their damp shadow, were massed together real bushes of living flowers, hedges of zoophytes, on which blossomed some zebrameandrines, with crooked grooves, some yellow caryophylliæ; and, to complete the allusion, the fish-flies flew from branch to branch like a swarm of humming-birds, whilst yellow lepisacomthi, with bristling jaws, dactylopteri, and monocentrides rose at our feet like a flight of snipes.
In about an hour Captain Nemo gave the signal to halt. I, for my part, was not sorry, and we stretched ourselves under an arbour of alariæ, the long thin blades of which stood up like arrows. This short rest seemed delicious to me; there was nothing wanting but the charm of conversation; but, impossible to speak, impossible to answer, I only put my great copper head to Conseil's. I saw the worthy fellow's eyes glistening with delight, and to show his satisfaction, he shook himself in his breastplate of air in the most comical way in the world.
After four hours of this walking I was surprised not to find myself dreadfully hungry. How to account for this state of the stomach I could not tell. But instead I felt an insurmountable desire to sleep, which happens to all divers. And my eyes soon closed behind the thick glasses, and I fell into a heavy slumber, which the movement alone had prevented before. Captain Nemo and his robust companion, stretched in the clear crystal, set us the example.
How long I remained buried in this drowsiness I cannot judge; but, when I woke, the sun seemed sinking towards the horizon. Captain Nemo had already risen, and I was beginning to stretch my limbs, when an unexpected apparition brought me briskly to my feet. A few steps off, a monstrous sea-spider, about thirty-eight inches high, was watching me with squinting eyes, ready to spring upon me. Though my diver's dress was thick enough to defend me from the bite of this animal, I could not help shuddering with horror. Conseil and the sailor of the Nautilus awoke at this moment. Captain Nemo pointed out the hideous crustacean, which a blow from the butt end of the gun knocked over, and I saw the horrible claws of the monster writhe in terrible convulsions. This accident reminded me that other animals more to be feared might haunt these obscure depths, against whose attacks my diving-dress would not protect me. I had never thought of it before, but I now resolved to be upon my guard. Indeed, I thought that this halt would mark the termination of our walk; but I was mistaken, for, instead of returning to the Nautilus, Captain Nemo continued his bold excursion. The ground was still on the incline, its declivity seemed to be getting greater, and to be leading us to greater depths. It must have been about three o'clock when we reached a narrow valley, between high perpendicular walls, situated about seventy-five fathoms deep. Thanks to the perfection of our apparatus, we were forty-five fathoms below the limit which nature seems to have imposed on man as to his submarine excursions.
I say seventy-five fathoms, though I had no instrument by which to judge the distance. But I knew that even in the clearest waters the solar rays could not penetrate further. And accordingly the darkness deepened. At ten paces not an object was visible. I was groping my way, when I suddenly saw a brilliant white light. Captain Nemo had just put his electric apparatus into use; his companion did the same, and Conseil and I followed their example. By turning a screw I established a communication between the wire and the spiral glass, and the sea, lit by our four lanterns, was illuminated for a circle of thirty-six yards. Captain Nemo was still plunging into the dark depths of the forest, whose trees were getting scarcer at every step. I noticed that vegetable life disappeared sooner than animal life. The medusæ had already abandoned the arid soil, from which a great number of animals, zoophytes, articulata, molluscs, and fishes, still obtained sustenance. As we walked I, thought the light of our Ruhmkorff apparatus could not fail to draw some inhabitant from its dark couch. But if they did approach us, they at least kept at a respectful distance from the hunters. Several times I saw Captain Nemo stop, put his gun to his shoulder, and after some moments drop it and walk on. At last, after about four hours, this marvellous excursion came to an end. A wall of superb rocks, in an imposing mass, rose before us, a heap of gigantic blocks, an enormous, steep granite shore, forming dark grottos, but which presented no practicable slope; it was the prop of the Island of Crespo. It was the earth! Captain Nemo stopped suddenly. A gesture of his brought us all to a halt, and, however desirous I might be to scale the wall, I was obliged to stop. Here ended Captain Nemo's domains. And he would not go beyond them. Further on was a portion of the globe he might not trample upon.
The return began. Captain Nemo had returned to the head of his little band, directing their course without hesitation. I thought we were not following the same road to return to the Nautilus. The new road was very steep, and consequently very painful. We approached the surface of the sea rapidly. But this return to the upper strata was not so sudden as to cause relief from the pressure too rapidly, which might have produced serious disorder in our organisation, and brought on internal lesions, so fatal to divers. Very soon light reappeared and grew, and the sun being low on the horizon, the refraction edged the different objects with a spectral ring. At ten yards and a half deep, we walked amidst a shoal of little fishes of all kinds, more numerous than the birds of the air, and also more agile; but no aquatic game worthy of a shot had as yet met our gaze, when at that moment I saw the Captain shoulder his gun quickly, and follow a moving object into the shrubs. He fired;-I heard a slight hissing, and a creature fell stunned at some distance from us. It was a magnificent sea-otter, an enhydrus, the only exclusively marine quadruped. This otter was five feet long, and must have been very valuable. Its skin, chestnut-brown above and silvery underneath, would have made one of those beautiful furs so sought after in the Russian and Chinese markets; the fineness and the lustre of its coat would certainly fetch £80. I admired this curious mammal, with its rounded head ornamented with short ears, its round eyes, and white whiskers like those of a cat, with webbed feet and nails, and tufted tail. This precious animal, hunted and tracked by fishermen, has now become very rare, and taken refuge chiefly in the northern parts of the Pacific, or probably its race would soon become extinct. Captain Nemo's companion took the beast, threw it over his shoulder, and we continued our journey. For one hour a plain of sand lay stretched before us. Sometimes it rose to within two yards and some inches of the surface of the water. I then saw our image clearly reflected, drawn inversely, and above us appeared an identical group reflecting our movements and our actions; in a word, like us in every point, except that they walked with their heads downward and their feet in the air.
Another effect I noticed, which was the passage of thick clouds which formed and vanished rapidly; but on reflection I understood that these seeming clouds were due to the varying thickness of the reeds at the bottom, and I could even see the fleecy foam which their broken tops multiplied on the water, and the shadows of large birds passing above our heads, whose rapid flight I could discern on the surface of the sea.
On this occasion, I was witness to one of the finest gun-shots which ever made the nerves of a hunter thrill. A large bird of great breadth of wing, clearly visible, approached, hovering over us. Captain Nemo's companion shouldered his gun and fired, when it was only a few yards above the waves. The creature fell stunned, and the force of its fall brought it within the reach of dexterous hunter's grasp. It was an albatross of the finest kind.
Our march had not been interrupted by this incident. For two hours we followed these sandy plains, then fields of algæ very disagreeable to cross. Candidly, I could do no more when I saw a glimmer of light, which, for a half mile, broke the darkness of the waters. It was the lantern of the Nautilus. Before twenty minutes were over we should be on board, and I should be able to breathe with ease, for it seemed that my reservoir supplied air very deficient in oxygen. But I did not reckon on an accidental meeting, which delayed our arrival for some time.
I had remained some steps behind, when I presently saw Captain Nemo coming hurriedly towards me. With his strong hand he bent me to the ground, his companion doing the same to Conseil. At first I knew not what to think of this sudden attack, but I was soon reassured by seeing the Captain lie down beside me, and remain immovable. I was stretched on the ground, just under the shelter of a bush of algæ, when, raising my head, I saw some enormous mass, casting phosphorescent gleams, pass blusteringly by.
My blood froze in my veins as I recognised two formidable sharks which threatened us. It was a couple of tintoreas, terrible creatures, with enormous tails and a dull glassy stare, the phosphorescent matter ejected from holes pierced around the muzzle. Monstrous brutes! which would crush a whole man in their iron jaws. I did not know whether Conseil stopped to classify them; for my part, I noticed their silver bellies, and their huge mouths bristling with teeth, from a very unscientific point of view, and more as a possible victim than as a naturalist.
Happily the voracious creatures do not see well. They passed without seeing us, brushing us with their brownish fins, and we escaped by a miracle from a danger certainly greater than meeting a tiger full-face in the forest. Half an hour after, guided by the electric light, we reached the Nautilus. The outside door had been left open, and Captain Nemo closed it as soon as we had entered the first cell. He then pressed a knob. I heard the pumps working in the midst of the vessel, I felt the water sinking from around me, and in a few moments the cell was entirely empty. The inside door then opened, and we entered the vestry.
There our diving-dress was taken off, not without some trouble; and, fairly worn out from want of food and sleep. I returned to my room, in great wonder at this surprising excursion at the bottom of the sea.
The next morning, the 18th of November, I had quite recovered from my fatigues of the day before, and I went up on to the platform, just as the second lieutenant was uttering his daily phrase. I was admiring the magnificent aspect of the ocean when Captain Nemo appeared. He did not seem to be aware of my presence, and began a series of astronomical observations. Then, when he had finished, he went and leant on the cage of the watch-light, and gazed abstractedly on the ocean. In the meantime, a number of the sailors of the Nautilus, all strong and healthy men, had come up onto the platform. They came to draw up the nets that had been laid all night. These sailors were evidently of different nations, although the European type was visible in all of them. I recognised some unmistakable Irishmen, Frenchmen, some Sclaves, and a Greek, or a Candiote. They were civil, and only used that odd language among themselves, the origin of which I could not guess, neither could I question them.
The nets were hauled in. They were a large kind of "chaluts," like those on the Normandy coasts, great pockets that the waves and a chain fixed in the smaller meshes kept open. These pockets, drawn by iron poles, swept through the water, and gathered in everything in their way. That day they brought up curious specimens from those productive coasts.
I reckoned that the haul had brought in more than nine hundredweight of fish. It was a fine haul, but not to be wondered at. Indeed, the nets are let down for several hours, and enclose in their meshes an infinite variety. We had no lack of excellent food, and the rapidity of the Nautilus and the attraction of the electric light could always renew our supply. These several productions of the sea were immediately lowered through the panel to the steward's room, some to be eaten fresh, and others pickled.
The fishing ended, the provision of air renewed, I thought that the Nautilus was about to continue its submarine excursion, and was preparing to return to my room, when, without further preamble, the
Captain turned to me, saying:
"Professor, is not this ocean gifted with real life? It has its tempers and its gentle moods. Yesterday it slept as we did, and now it has woke after a quiet night. Look!" he continued, "it wakes under the caresses of the sun. It is going to renew its diurnal existence. It is an interesting study to watch the play of its organisation. It has a pulse, arteries, spasms; and I agree with the learned Maury, who discovered in it a circulation as real as the circulation of blood in animals.
"Yes, the ocean has indeed circulation, and to promote it, the Creator has caused things to multiply in it-caloric, salt, and animalculae." When Captain Nemo spoke thus, he seemed altogether changed, and aroused an extraordinary emotion in me.
"Also," he added, "true existence is there; and I can imagine the foundations of nautical towns, clusters of submarine houses, which, like the Nautilus, would ascend every morning to breathe at the surface of the water, free towns, independent cities. Yet who knows whether some despot--"
Captain Nemo finished his sentence with a violent gesture. Then, addressing me as if to chase away some sorrowful thought: "M. Aronnax," he asked, "do you know the depth of the ocean?" "I only know, Captain, what the principal soundings have taught us." "Could you tell me them, so that I can suit them to my purpose?" "These are some," I replied, "that I remember. If I am not mistaken, a depth of 8,000 yards has been found in the North Atlantic, and 2,500 yards in the Mediterranean. The most remarkable soundings have been made in the South Atlantic, near the thirty-fifth parallel, and they gave 12,000 yards, 14,000 yards, and 15,000 yards. To sum up all, it is reckoned that if the bottom of the sea were levelled, its mean depth would be about one and three-quarter leagues."
"Well, Professor," replied the Captain, "we shall show you better than that I hope. As to the mean depth of this part of the Pacific, I tell you it is only 4,000 yards."
Having said this, Captain Nemo went towards the panel, and disappeared down the ladder. I followed him, and went into the large drawing-room. The screw was immediately put in motion, and the log gave twenty miles an hour.
During the days and weeks that passed, Captain Nemo was very sparing of his visits. I seldom saw him. The lieutenant pricked the ship's course regularly on the chart, so I could always tell exactly the route of the Nautilus.
Nearly every day, for some time, the panels of the drawing-room were opened, and we were never tired of penetrating the mysteries of the submarine world.
The general direction of the Nautilus was south-east, and it kept between 100 and 150 yards of depth. One day, however, I do not know why, being drawn diagonally by means of the inclined planes, it touched the bed of the sea. The thermometer indicated a temperature of 4.25 (cent.): a temperature that at this depth seemed common to all latitudes.
At three o'clock in the morning of the 26th of November the Nautilus crossed the tropic of Cancer at 172° long. On 27th instant it sighted the Sandwich Islands, where Cook died, February 14, 1779. We had then gone 4,860 leagues from our starting-point. In the morning, when I went on the platform, I saw two miles to windward, Hawaii, the largest of the seven islands that form the group. I saw clearly the cultivated ranges, and the several mountain-chains that run parallel with the side, and the volcanoes that overtop Mouna-Rea, which rise 5,000 yards above the level of the sea. Besides other things the nets brought up, were several flabellariae and graceful polypi, that are peculiar to that part of the ocean. The direction of the Nautilus was still to the south-east. It crossed the equator December 1, in 142° long.; and on the 4th of the same month, after crossing rapidly and without anything in particular occurring, we sighted the Marquesas group. I saw, three miles off, Martin's peak in Nouka-Hiva, the largest of the group that belongs to France. I only saw the woody mountains against the horizon, because Captain Nemo did not wish to bring the ship to the wind. There the nets brought up beautiful specimens of fish: some with azure fins and tails like gold, the flesh of which is unrivalled; some nearly destitute of scales, but of exquisite flavour; others, with bony jaws, and yellow-tinged gills, as good as bonitos; all fish that would be of use to us. After leaving these charming islands protected by the French flag, from the 4th to the 11th of December the Nautilus sailed over about 2,000 miles.
During the daytime of the 11th of December I was busy reading in the large drawing-room. Ned Land and Conseil watched the luminous water through the half-open panels. The Nautilus was immovable. While its reservoirs were filled, it kept at a depth of 1,000 yards, a region rarely visited in the ocean, and in which large fish were seldom seen. I was then reading a charming book by Jean Mace, The Slaves of the Stomach, and I was learning some valuable lessons from it, when Conseil interrupted me.
"Will master come here a moment?" he said, in a curious voice.
"What is the matter, Conseil?"
"I want master to look."
I rose, went, and leaned on my elbows before the panes and watched. In a full electric light, an enormous black mass, quite immovable, was suspended in the midst of the waters. I watched it attentively, seeking to find out the nature of this gigantic cetacean. But a sudden thought crossed my mind. "A vessel!" I said, half aloud.
"Yes," replied the Canadian, "a disabled ship that has sunk perpendicularly."
Ned Land was right; we were close to a vessel of which the tattered shrouds still hung from their chains. The keel seemed to be in good order, and it had been wrecked at most some few hours. Three stumps of masts, broken off about two feet above the bridge, showed that the vessel had had to sacrifice its masts. But, lying on its side, it had filled, and it was heeling over to port. This skeleton of what it had once been was a sad spectacle as it lay lost under the waves, but sadder still was the sight of the bridge, where some corpses, bound with ropes, were still lying. I counted five-four men, one of whom was standing at the helm, and a woman standing by the poop, holding an infant in her arms. She was quite young. I could distinguish her features, which the water had not decomposed, by the brilliant light from the Nautilus. In one despairing effort, she had raised her infant above her head-poor little thing!-whose arms encircled its mother's neck. The attitude of the four sailors was frightful, distorted as they were by their convulsive movements, whilst making a last effort to free themselves from the cords that bound them to the vessel. The steersman alone, calm, with a grave, clear face, his grey hair glued to his forehead, and his hand clutching the wheel of the helm, seemed even then to be guiding the three broken masts through the depths of the ocean.
What a scene! We were dumb; our hearts beat fast before this shipwreck, taken as it were from life and photographed in its last moments. And I saw already, coming towards it with hungry eyes, enormous sharks, attracted by the human flesh.
However, the Nautilus, turning, went round the submerged vessel, and in one instant I read on the stern-"The Florida, Sunderland."
This terrible spectacle was the forerunner of the series of maritime catastrophes that the Nautilus was destined to meet with in its route. As long as it went through more frequented waters, we often saw the hulls of shipwrecked vessels that were rotting in the depths, and deeper down cannons, bullets, anchors, chains, and a thousand other iron materials eaten up by rust. However, on the 11th of December we sighted the Pomotou Islands, the old "dangerous group" of Bougainville, that extend over a space of 500 leagues at E.S.E. to W.N.W., from the Island Ducie to that of Lazareff. This group covers an area of 370 square leagues, and it is formed of sixty groups of islands, among which the Gambier group is remarkable, over which France exercises sway. These are coral islands, slowly raised, but continuous, created by the daily work of polypi. Then this new island will be joined later on to the neighboring groups, and a fifth continent will stretch from New Zealand and New Caledonia, and from thence to the Marquesas. One day, when I was suggesting this theory to Captain Nemo, he replied coldly:
"The earth does not want new continents, but new men." Chance had conducted the Nautilus towards the Island of Clermont-Tonnere, one of the most curious of the group, that was discovered in 1822 by Captain Bell of the Minerva. I could study now the madreporal system, to which are due the islands in this ocean. Madrepores (which must not be mistaken for corals) have a tissue lined with a calcareous crust, and the modifications of its structure have induced M. Milne Edwards, my worthy master, to class them into five sections. The animalcule that the marine polypus secretes live by millions at the bottom of their cells. Their calcareous deposits become rocks, reefs, and large and small islands. Here they form a ring, surrounding a little inland lake, that communicates with the sea by means of gaps. There they make barriers of reefs like those on the coasts of New Caledonia and the various Pomoton islands. In other places, like those at Reunion and at Maurice, they raise fringed reefs, high, straight walls, near which the depth of the ocean is considerable.
Some cable-lengths off the shores of the Island of Clermont I admired the gigantic work accomplished by these microscopical workers. These walls are specially the work of those madrepores known as milleporas, porites, madrepores, and astraeas. These polypi are found particularly in the rough beds of the sea, near the surface; and consequently it is from the upper part that they begin their operations, in which they bury themselves by degrees with the debris of the secretions that support them. Such is, at least, Darwin's theory, who thus explains the formation of the _atolls_, a superior theory (to my mind) to that given of the foundation of the madreporical works, summits of mountains or volcanoes, that are submerged some feet below the level of the sea. I could observe closely these curious walls, for perpendicularly they were more than 300 yards deep, and our electric sheets lighted up this calcareous matter brilliantly. Replying to a question Conseil asked me as to the time these colossal barriers took to be raised, I astonished him much by telling him that learned men reckoned it about the eighth of an inch in a hundred years.
Towards evening Clermont-Tonnerre was lost in the distance, and the route of the Nautilus was sensibly changed. After having crossed the tropic of Capricorn in 135° longitude, it sailed W.N.W., making again for the tropical zone. Although the summer sun was very strong, we did not suffer from heat, for at fifteen or twenty fathoms below the surface, the temperature did not rise above from ten to twelve degrees. On 15th of December, we left to the east the bewitching group of the Societies and the graceful Tahiti, queen of the Pacific. I saw in the morning, some miles to the windward, the elevated summits of the island. These waters furnished our table with excellent fish, mackerel, bonitos, and some varieties of a sea-serpent.
On the 25th of December the Nautilus sailed into the midst of the New Hebrides, discovered by Quiros in 1606, and that Bougainville explored in 1768, and to which Cook gave its present name in 1773. This group is composed principally of nine large islands, that form a band of 120 leagues N.N.S. to S.S.W., between 15° and 2° S. lat., and 164 deg. and 168° long. We passed tolerably near to the Island of Aurou, that at noon looked like a mass of green woods, surmounted by a peak of great height.
That day being Christmas Day, Ned Land seemed to regret sorely the non-celebration of "Christmas," the family fete of which Protestants are so fond. I had not seen Captain Nemo for a week, when, on the morning of the 27th, he came into the large drawing-room, always seeming as if he had seen you five minutes before. I was busily tracing the route of the Nautilus on the planisphere. The Captain came up to me, put his finger on one spot on the chart, and said this single word.
"Vanikoro."
The effect was magical! It was the name of the islands on which La Perouse had been lost! I rose suddenly.
"The Nautilus has brought us to Vanikoro?" I asked. "Yes, Professor," said the Captain.
"And I can visit the celebrated islands where the Boussole and the
Astrolabe struck?"
"If you like, Professor."
"When shall we be there?"
"We are there now."
Followed by Captain Nemo, I went up on to the platform, and greedily scanned the horizon.
To the N.E. two volcanic islands emerged of unequal size, surrounded by a coral reef that measured forty miles in circumference. We were close to Vanikoro, really the one to which Dumont d'Urville gave the name of Isle de la Recherche, and exactly facing the little harbour of Vanou, situated in 16° 4′ S. lat., and 164° 32′ E. long. The earth seemed covered with verdure from the shore to the summits in the interior, that were crowned by Mount Kapogo, 476 feet high. The Nautilus, having passed the outer belt of rocks by a narrow strait, found itself among breakers where the sea was from thirty to forty fathoms deep. Under the verdant shade of some mangroves I perceived some savages, who appeared greatly surprised at our approach. In the long black body, moving between wind and water, did they not see some formidable cetacean that they regarded with suspicion?
Just then Captain Nemo asked me what I knew about the wreck of La
Perouse.
"Only what everyone knows, Captain," I replied.
"And could you tell me what everyone knows about it?" he inquired, ironically.
"Easily."
I related to him all that the last works of Dumont d'Urville had made known-works from which the following is a brief account. La Perouse, and his second, Captain de Langle, were sent by Louis XVI, in 1785, on a voyage of circumnavigation. They embarked in the corvettes Boussole and the Astrolabe, neither of which were again heard of. In 1791, the French Government, justly uneasy as to the fate of these two sloops, manned two large merchantmen, the Recherche and the Esperance, which left Brest the 28th of September under the command of
Bruni d'Entrecasteaux.
Two months after, they learned from Bowen, commander of the Albemarle, that the debris of shipwrecked vessels had been seen on the coasts of New Georgia. But D'Entrecasteaux, ignoring this communication-rather uncertain, besides-directed his course towards the Admiralty Islands, mentioned in a report of Captain Hunter's as being the place where La
Perouse was wrecked.
They sought in vain. The Esperance and the Recherche passed before Vanikoro without stopping there, and, in fact, this voyage was most disastrous, as it cost D'Entrecasteaux his life, and those of two of his lieutenants, besides several of his crew.
Captain Dillon, a shrewd old Pacific sailor, was the first to find unmistakable traces of the wrecks. On the 15th of May, 1824, his vessel, the St. Patrick, passed close to Tikopia, one of the New Hebrides. There a Lascar came alongside in a canoe, sold him the handle of a sword in silver that bore the print of characters engraved on the hilt. The Lascar pretended that six years before, during a stay at Vanikoro, he had seen two Europeans that belonged to some vessels that had run aground on the reefs some years ago.
Dillon guessed that he meant La Perouse, whose disappearance had troubled the whole world. He tried to get on to Vanikoro, where, according to the Lascar, he would find numerous debris of the wreck, but winds and tides prevented him.
Dillon returned to Calcutta. There he interested the Asiatic Society and the Indian Company in his discovery. A vessel, to which was given the name of the Recherche, was put at his disposal, and he set out, 23rd January, 1827, accompanied by a French agent. The Recherche, after touching at several points in the Pacific, cast anchor before Vanikoro, 7th July, 1827, in that same harbour of Vanou where the Nautilus was at this time.
There it collected numerous relics of the wreck-iron utensils, anchors, pulley-strops, swivel-guns, an 18 lbs. shot, fragments of astronomical instruments, a piece of crown work, and a bronze clock, bearing this inscription-"Bazin m'a fait," the mark of the foundry of the arsenal at Brest about 1785. There could be no further doubt. Dillon, having made all inquiries, stayed in the unlucky place till October. Then he quitted Vanikoro, and directed his course towards New Zealand; put into Calcutta, 7th April, 1828, and returned to France, where he was warmly welcomed by Charles X.
But at the same time, without knowing Dillon's movements, Dumont d'Urville had already set out to find the scene of the wreck. And they had learned from a whaler that some medals and a cross of St. Louis had been found in the hands of some savages of Louisiade and New Caledonia. Dumont d'Urville, commander of the Astrolabe, had then sailed, and two months after Dillon had left Vanikoro he put into Hobart Town. There he learned the results of Dillon's inquiries, and found that a certain James Hobbs, second lieutenant of the Union of Calcutta, after landing on an island situated 8° 18′ S. lat., and 156° 30′ E. long., had seen some iron bars and red stuffs used by the natives of these parts. Dumont d'Urville, much perplexed, and not knowing how to credit the reports of low-class journals, decided to follow Dillon's track. On the 10th of February, 1828, the Astrolabe appeared off Tikopia, and took as guide and interpreter a deserter found on the island; made his way to Vanikoro, sighted it on the 12th inst., lay among the reefs until the 14th, and not until the 20th did he cast anchor within the barrier in the harbour of Vanou.
On the 23rd, several officers went round the island and brought back some unimportant trifles. The natives, adopting a system of denials and evasions, refused to take them to the unlucky place. This ambiguous conduct led them to believe that the natives had ill-treated the castaways, and indeed they seemed to fear that Dumont d'Urville had come to avenge La Perouse and his unfortunate crew. However, on the 26th, appeased by some presents, and understanding that they had no reprisals to fear, they led M. Jacquireot to the scene of the wreck.
There, in three or four fathoms of water, between the reefs of Pacou and Vanou, lay anchors, cannons, pigs of lead and iron, embedded in the limy concretions. The large boat and the whaler belonging to the Astrolabe were sent to this place, and, not without some difficulty, their crews hauled up an anchor weighing 1,800 lbs., a brass gun, some pigs of iron, and two copper swivel-guns.
Dumont d'Urville, questioning the natives, learned too that La Perouse, after losing both his vessels on the reefs of this island, had constructed a smaller boat, only to be lost a second time. Where, no one knew.
But the French Government, fearing that Dumont d'Urville was not acquainted with Dillon's movements, had sent the sloop Bayonnaise, commanded by Legoarant de Tromelin, to Vanikoro, which had been stationed on the west coast of America. The Bayonnaise cast her anchor before Vanikoro some months after the departure of the Astrolabe, but found no new document; but stated that the savages had respected the monument to La Perouse. That is the substance of what I told Captain
Nemo.
"So," he said, "no one knows now where the third vessel perished that was constructed by the castaways on the island of Vanikoro?"
"No one knows."
Captain Nemo said nothing, but signed to me to follow him into the large saloon. The Nautilus sank several yards below the waves, and the panels were opened.
I hastened to the aperture, and under the crustations of coral, covered with fungi, syphonules, alcyons, madrepores, through myriads of charming fish-girelles, glyphisidri, pompherides, diacopes, and holocentres-I recognised certain debris that the drags had not been able to tear up-iron stirrups, anchors, cannons, bullets, capstan fittings, the stem of a ship, all objects clearly proving the wreck of some vessel, and now carpeted with living flowers. While I was looking on this desolate scene, Captain Nemo said, in a sad voice: "Commander La Perouse set out 7th December, 1785, with his vessels La Boussole and the Astrolabe. He first cast anchor at Botany Bay, visited the Friendly Isles, New Caledonia, then directed his course towards Santa Cruz, and put into Namouka, one of the Hapai group. Then his vessels struck on the unknown reefs of Vanikoro. The Boussole, which went first, ran aground on the southerly coast. The Astrolabe went to its help, and ran aground too. The first vessel was destroyed almost immediately. The second, stranded under the wind, resisted some days. The natives made the castaways welcome. They installed themselves in the island, and constructed a smaller boat with the debris of the two large ones. Some sailors stayed willingly at Vanikoro; the others, weak and ill, set out with La Perouse. They directed their course towards the Solomon Islands, and there perished, with everything, on the westerly coast of the chief island of the group, between Capes
Deception and Satisfaction."
"How do you know that?"
"By this, that I found on the spot where was the last wreck." Captain Nemo showed me a tin-plate box, stamped with the French arms, and corroded by the salt water. He opened it, and I saw a bundle of papers, yellow but still readable.
They were the instructions of the naval minister to Commander La Perouse, annotated in the margin in Louis XVI's handwriting. "Ah! it is a fine death for a sailor!" said Captain Nemo, at last. "A coral tomb makes a quiet grave; and I trust that I and my comrades will find no other."
During the night of the 27th or 28th of December, the Nautilus left the shores of Vanikoro with great speed. Her course was south-westerly, and in three days she had gone over the 750 leagues that separated it from La Perouse's group and the south-east point of Papua. Early on the 1st of January, 1863, Conseil joined me on the platform. "Master, will you permit me to wish you a happy New Year?" "What! Conseil; exactly as if I was at Paris in my study at the Jardin des Plantes? Well, I accept your good wishes, and thank you for them. Only, I will ask you what you mean by a 'Happy New Year' under our circumstances? Do you mean the year that will bring us to the end of our imprisonment, or the year that sees us continue this strange voyage?"
"Really, I do not know how to answer, master. We are sure to see curious things, and for the last two months we have not had time for dullness. The last marvel is always the most astonishing; and, if we continue this progression, I do not know how it will end. It is my opinion that we shall never again see the like. I think then, with no offence to master, that a happy year would be one in which we could see everything."
On 2nd January we had made 11,340 miles, or 5,250 French leagues, since our starting-point in the Japan Seas. Before the ship's head stretched the dangerous shores of the coral sea, on the north-east coast of Australia. Our boat lay along some miles from the redoubtable bank on which Cook's vessel was lost, 10th June, 1770. The boat in which Cook was struck on a rock, and, if it did not sink, it was owing to a piece of coral that was broken by the shock, and fixed itself in the broken keel.
I had wished to visit the reef, 360 leagues long, against which the sea, always rough, broke with great violence, with a noise like thunder. But just then the inclined planes drew the Nautilus down to a great depth, and I could see nothing of the high coral walls. I had to content myself with the different specimens of fish brought up by the nets. I remarked, among others, some germons, a species of mackerel as large as a tunny, with bluish sides, and striped with transverse bands, that disappear with the animal's life.
These fish followed us in shoals, and furnished us with very delicate food. We took also a large number of gilt-heads, about one and a half inches long, tasting like dorys; and flying pyrapeds like submarine swallows, which, in dark nights, light alternately the air and water with their phosphorescent light. Among the molluscs and zoophytes, I found in the meshes of the net several species of alcyonarians, echini, hammers, spurs, dials, cerites, and hyalleae. The flora was represented by beautiful floating seaweeds, laminariae, and macrocystes, impregnated with the mucilage that transudes through their pores; and among which I gathered an admirable Nemastoma Geliniarois, that was classed among the natural curiosities of the museum. Two days after crossing the coral sea, 4th January, we sighted the Papuan coasts. On this occasion, Captain Nemo informed me that his intention was to get into the Indian Ocean by the Strait of Torres. His communication ended there.
The Torres Straits are nearly thirty-four leagues wide; but they are obstructed by an innumerable quantity of islands, islets, breakers, and rocks, that make its navigation almost impracticable; so that Captain Nemo took all needful precautions to cross them. The Nautilus, floating betwixt wind and water, went at a moderate pace. Her screw, like a cetacean's tail, beat the waves slowly.
Profiting by this, I and my two companions went up on to the deserted platform. Before us was the steersman's cage, and I expected that Captain Nemo was there directing the course of the Nautilus. I had before me the excellent charts of the Straits of Torres, and I consulted them attentively. Round the Nautilus the sea dashed furiously. The course of the waves, that went from south-east to north-west at the rate of two and a half miles, broke on the coral that showed itself here and there.
"This is a bad sea!" remarked Ned Land.
"Detestable indeed, and one that does not suit a boat like the Nautilus."
"The Captain must be very sure of his route, for I see there pieces of coral that would do for its keel if it only touched them slightly." Indeed the situation was dangerous, but the Nautilus seemed to slide like magic off these rocks. It did not follow the routes of the Astrolabe and the Zelee exactly, for they proved fatal to Dumont d'Urville. It bore more northwards, coasted the Islands of Murray, and came back to the south-west towards Cumberland Passage. I thought it was going to pass it by, when, going back to north-west, it went through a large quantity of islands and islets little known, towards the Island Sound and Canal Mauvais.
I wondered if Captain Nemo, foolishly imprudent, would steer his vessel into that pass where Dumont d'Urville's two corvettes touched; when, swerving again, and cutting straight through to the west, he steered for the Island of Gilboa.
It was then three in the afternoon. The tide began to recede, being quite full. The Nautilus approached the island, that I still saw, with its remarkable border of screw-pines. He stood off it at about two miles distant. Suddenly a shock overthrew me. The Nautilus just touched a rock, and stayed immovable, laying lightly to port side. When I rose, I perceived Captain Nemo and his lieutenant on the platform. They were examining the situation of the vessel, and exchanging words in their incomprehensible dialect. She was situated thus: Two miles, on the starboard side, appeared Gilboa, stretching from north to west like an immense arm. Towards the south and east some coral showed itself, left by the ebb. We had run aground, and in one of those seas where the tides are middling-a sorry matter for the floating of the Nautilus. However, the vessel had not suffered, for her keel was solidly joined. But, if she could neither glide off nor move, she ran the risk of being for ever fastened to these rocks, and then Captain Nemo's submarine vessel would be done for.
I was reflecting thus, when the Captain, cool and calm, always master of himself, approached me.
"An accident?" I asked.
"No; an incident."
"But an incident that will oblige you perhaps to become an inhabitant of this land from which you flee?"
Captain Nemo looked at me curiously, and made a negative gesture, as much as to say that nothing would force him to set foot on terra firma again. Then he said:
"Besides, M. Aronnax, the Nautilus is not lost; it will carry you yet into the midst of the marvels of the ocean. Our voyage is only begun, and I do not wish to be deprived so soon of the honour of your company."
"However, Captain Nemo," I replied, without noticing the ironical turn of his phrase, "the Nautilus ran aground in open sea. Now the tides are not strong in the Pacific; and, if you cannot lighten the Nautilus, I do not see how it will be reinflated." "The tides are not strong in the Pacific: you are right there, Professor; but in Torres Straits one finds still a difference of a yard and a half between the level of high and low seas. To-day is 4th January, and in five days the moon will be full. Now, I shall be very much astonished if that satellite does not raise these masses of water sufficiently, and render me a service that I should be indebted to her for."
Having said this, Captain Nemo, followed by his lieutenant, redescended to the interior of the Nautilus. As to the vessel, it moved not, and was immovable, as if the coralline polypi had already walled it up with their in destructible cement.
"Well, sir?" said Ned Land, who came up to me after the departure of the Captain.
"Well, friend Ned, we will wait patiently for the tide on the 9th instant; for it appears that the moon will have the goodness to put it off again."
"Really?"
"Really."
"And this Captain is not going to cast anchor at all since the tide will suffice?" said Conseil, simply.
The Canadian looked at Conseil, then shrugged his shoulders. "Sir, you may believe me when I tell you that this piece of iron will navigate neither on nor under the sea again; it is only fit to be sold for its weight. I think, therefore, that the time has come to part company with Captain Nemo."
"Friend Ned, I do not despair of this stout Nautilus, as you do; and in four days we shall know what to hold to on the Pacific tides. Besides, flight might be possible if we were in sight of the English or Provencal coast; but on the Papuan shores, it is another thing; and it will be time enough to come to that extremity if the Nautilus does not recover itself again, which I look upon as a grave event." "But do they know, at least, how to act circumspectly? There is an island; on that island there are trees; under those trees, terrestrial animals, bearers of cutlets and roast beef, to which I would willingly give a trial."
"In this, friend Ned is right," said Conseil, "and I agree with him. Could not master obtain permission from his friend Captain Nemo to put us on land, if only so as not to lose the habit of treading on the solid parts of our planet?"
"I can ask him, but he will refuse."
"Will master risk it?" asked Conseil, "and we shall know how to rely upon the Captain's amiability."
To my great surprise, Captain Nemo gave me the permission I asked for, and he gave it very agreeably, without even exacting from me a promise to return to the vessel; but flight across New Guinea might be very perilous, and I should not have counselled Ned Land to attempt it. Better to be a prisoner on board the Nautilus than to fall into the hands of the natives.
At eight o'clock, armed with guns and hatchets, we got off the Nautilus. The sea was pretty calm; a slight breeze blew on land. Conseil and I rowing, we sped along quickly, and Ned steered in the straight passage that the breakers left between them. The boat was well handled, and moved rapidly.
Ned Land could not restrain his joy. He was like a prisoner that had escaped from prison, and knew not that it was necessary to re-enter it. "Meat! We are going to eat some meat; and what meat!" he replied. "Real game! no, bread, indeed."
"I do not say that fish is not good; we must not abuse it; but a piece of fresh venison, grilled on live coals, will agreeably vary our ordinary course."
"Glutton!" said Conseil, "he makes my mouth water." "It remains to be seen," I said, "if these forests are full of game, and if the game is not such as will hunt the hunter himself." "Well said, M. Aronnax," replied the Canadian, whose teeth seemed sharpened like the edge of a hatchet; "but I will eat tiger-loin of tiger-if there is no other quadruped on this island." "Friend Ned is uneasy about it," said Conseil.
"Whatever it may be," continued Ned Land, "every animal with four paws without feathers, or with two paws without feathers, will be saluted by my first shot."
"Very well! Master Land's imprudences are beginning." "Never fear, M. Aronnax," replied the Canadian; "I do not want twenty-five minutes to offer you a dish, of my sort." At half-past eight the Nautilus boat ran softly aground on a heavy sand, after having happily passed the coral reef that surrounds the
Island of Gilboa.
I was much impressed on touching land. Ned Land tried the soil with his feet, as if to take possession of it. However, it was only two months before that we had become, according to Captain Nemo, "passengers on board the Nautilus," but, in reality, prisoners of its commander. In a few minutes we were within musket-shot of the coast. The whole horizon was hidden behind a beautiful curtain of forests. Enormous trees, the trunks of which attained a height of 200 feet, were tied to each other by garlands of bindweed, real natural hammocks, which a light breeze rocked. They were mimosas, figs, hibisci, and palm trees, mingled together in profusion; and under the shelter of their verdant vault grew orchids, leguminous plants, and ferns. But, without noticing all these beautiful specimens of Papuan flora, the Canadian abandoned the agreeable for the useful. He discovered a coco-tree, beat down some of the fruit, broke them, and we drunk the milk and ate the nut with a satisfaction that protested against the ordinary food on the Nautilus.
"Excellent!" said Ned Land.
"Exquisite!" replied Conseil.
"And I do not think," said the Canadian, "that he would object to our introducing a cargo of coco-nuts on board."
"I do not think he would, but he would not taste them." "So much the worse for him," said Conseil.
"And so much the better for us," replied Ned Land. "There will be more for us."
"One word only, Master Land," I said to the harpooner, who was beginning to ravage another coco-nut tree. "Coco-nuts are good things, but before filling the canoe with them it would be wise to reconnoitre and see if the island does not produce some substance not less useful. Fresh vegetables would be welcome on board the Nautilus." "Master is right," replied Conseil; "and I propose to reserve three places in our vessel, one for fruits, the other for vegetables, and the third for the venison, of which I have not yet seen the smallest specimen."
"Conseil, we must not despair," said the Canadian. "Let us continue," I returned, "and lie in wait. Although the island seems uninhabited, it might still contain some individuals that would be less hard than we on the nature of game."
"Ho! ho!" said Ned Land, moving his jaws significantly.
"Well, Ned!" said Conseil.
"My word!" returned the Canadian, "I begin to understand the charms of anthropophagy."
"Ned! Ned! what are you saying? You, a man-eater? I should not feel safe with you, especially as I share your cabin. I might perhaps wake one day to find myself half devoured."
"Friend Conseil, I like you much, but not enough to eat you unnecessarily."
"I would not trust you," replied Conseil. "But enough. We must absolutely bring down some game to satisfy this cannibal, or else one of these fine mornings, master will find only pieces of his servant to serve him."
While we were talking thus, we were penetrating the sombre arches of the forest, and for two hours we surveyed it in all directions. Chance rewarded our search for eatable vegetables, and one of the most useful products of the tropical zones furnished us with precious food that we missed on board. I would speak of the bread-fruit tree, very abundant in the island of Gilboa; and I remarked chiefly the variety destitute of seeds, which bears in Malaya the name of "rima." Ned Land knew these fruits well. He had already eaten many during his numerous voyages, and he knew how to prepare the eatable substance. Moreover, the sight of them excited him, and he could contain himself no longer.
"Master," he said, "I shall die if I do not taste a little of this bread-fruit pie."
"Taste it, friend Ned-taste it as you want. We are here to make experiments-make them."
"It won't take long," said the Canadian.
And, provided with a lentil, he lighted a fire of dead wood that crackled joyously. During this time, Conseil and I chose the best fruits of the bread-fruit. Some had not then attained a sufficient degree of maturity; and their thick skin covered a white but rather fibrous pulp. Others, the greater number yellow and gelatinous, waited only to be picked.
These fruits enclosed no kernel. Conseil brought a dozen to Ned Land, who placed them on a coal fire, after having cut them in thick slices, and while doing this repeating:
"You will see, master, how good this bread is. More so when one has been deprived of it so long. It is not even bread," added he, "but a delicate pastry. You have eaten none, master?"
"No, Ned."
"Very well, prepare yourself for a juicy thing. If you do not come for more, I am no longer the king of harpooners."
After some minutes, the part of the fruits that was exposed to the fire was completely roasted. The interior looked like a white pasty, a sort of soft crumb, the flavour of which was like that of an artichoke. It must be confessed this bread was excellent, and I ate of it with great relish.
"What time is it now?" asked the Canadian.
"Two o'clock at least," replied Conseil.
"How time flies on firm ground!" sighed Ned Land. "Let us be off," replied Conseil.
We returned through the forest, and completed our collection by a raid upon the cabbage-palms, that we gathered from the tops of the trees, little beans that I recognised as the "abrou" of the Malays, and yams of a superior quality.
We were loaded when we reached the boat. But Ned Land did not find his provisions sufficient. Fate, however, favoured us. Just as we were pushing off, he perceived several trees, from twenty-five to thirty feet high, a species of palm-tree.
At last, at five o'clock in the evening, loaded with our riches, we quitted the shore, and half an hour after we hailed the Nautilus. No one appeared on our arrival. The enormous iron-plated cylinder seemed deserted. The provisions embarked, I descended to my chamber, and after supper slept soundly.
The next day, 6th January, nothing new on board. Not a sound inside, not a sign of life. The boat rested along the edge, in the same place in which we had left it. We resolved to return to the island. Ned Land hoped to be more fortunate than on the day before with regard to the hunt, and wished to visit another part of the forest. At dawn we set off. The boat, carried on by the waves that flowed to shore, reached the island in a few minutes.
We landed, and, thinking that it was better to give in to the Canadian, we followed Ned Land, whose long limbs threatened to distance us. He wound up the coast towards the west: then, fording some torrents, he gained the high plain that was bordered with admirable forests. Some kingfishers were rambling along the water-courses, but they would not let themselves be approached. Their circumspection proved to me that these birds knew what to expect from bipeds of our species, and I concluded that, if the island was not inhabited, at least human beings occasionally frequented it.
After crossing a rather large prairie, we arrived at the skirts of a little wood that was enlivened by the songs and flight of a large number of birds.
"There are only birds," said Conseil.
"But they are eatable," replied the harpooner.
"I do not agree with you, friend Ned, for I see only parrots there." "Friend Conseil," said Ned, gravely, "the parrot is like pheasant to those who have nothing else."
"And," I added, "this bird, suitably prepared, is worth knife and fork."
Indeed, under the thick foliage of this wood, a world of parrots were flying from branch to branch, only needing a careful education to speak the human language. For the moment, they were chattering with parrots of all colours, and grave cockatoos, who seemed to meditate upon some philosophical problem, whilst brilliant red lories passed like a piece of bunting carried away by the breeze, papuans, with the finest azure colours, and in all a variety of winged things most charming to behold, but few eatable.
However, a bird peculiar to these lands, and which has never passed the limits of the Arrow and Papuan islands, was wanting in this collection. But fortune reserved it for me before long.
After passing through a moderately thick copse, we found a plain obstructed with bushes. I saw then those magnificent birds, the disposition of whose long feathers obliges them to fly against the wind. Their undulating flight, graceful aerial curves, and the shading of their colours, attracted and charmed one's looks. I had no trouble in recognising them.
"Birds of paradise!" I exclaimed.
The Malays, who carry on a great trade in these birds with the Chinese, have several means that we could not employ for taking them. Sometimes they put snares on the top of high trees that the birds of paradise prefer to frequent. Sometimes they catch them with a viscous birdlime that paralyses their movements. They even go so far as to poison the fountains that the birds generally drink from. But we were obliged to fire at them during flight, which gave us few chances to bring them down; and, indeed, we vainly exhausted one half our ammunition. About eleven o'clock in the morning, the first range of mountains that form the centre of the island was traversed, and we had killed nothing. Hunger drove us on. The hunters had relied on the products of the chase, and they were wrong. Happily Conseil, to his great surprise, made a double shot and secured breakfast. He brought down a white pigeon and a wood-pigeon, which, cleverly plucked and suspended from a skewer, was roasted before a red fire of dead wood. While these interesting birds were cooking, Ned prepared the fruit of the bread-tree. Then the wood-pigeons were devoured to the bones, and declared excellent. The nutmeg, with which they are in the habit of stuffing their crops, flavours their flesh and renders it delicious eating.
"Now, Ned, what do you miss now?"
"Some four-footed game, M. Aronnax. All these pigeons are only side-dishes and trifles; and until I have killed an animal with cutlets
I shall not be content."
"Nor I, Ned, if I do not catch a bird of paradise." "Let us continue hunting," replied Conseil. "Let us go towards the sea. We have arrived at the first declivities of the mountains, and I think we had better regain the region of forests."
That was sensible advice, and was followed out. After walking for one hour we had attained a forest of sago-trees. Some inoffensive serpents glided away from us. The birds of paradise fled at our approach, and truly I despaired of getting near one when Conseil, who was walking in front, suddenly bent down, uttered a triumphal cry, and came back to me bringing a magnificent specimen.
"Ah! bravo, Conseil!"
"Master is very good."
"No, my boy; you have made an excellent stroke. Take one of these living birds, and carry it in your hand."
"If master will examine it, he will see that I have not deserved great merit."
"Why, Conseil?"
"Because this bird is as drunk as a quail."
"Drunk!"
"Yes, sir; drunk with the nutmegs that it devoured under the nutmeg-tree, under which I found it. See, friend Ned, see the monstrous effects of intemperance!"
"By Jove!" exclaimed the Canadian, "because I have drunk gin for two months, you must needs reproach me!"
However, I examined the curious bird. Conseil was right. The bird, drunk with the juice, was quite powerless. It could not fly; it could hardly walk.
This bird belonged to the most beautiful of the eight species that are found in Papua and in the neighbouring islands. It was the "large emerald bird, the most rare kind." It measured three feet in length. Its head was comparatively small, its eyes placed near the opening of the beak, and also small. But the shades of colour were beautiful, having a yellow beak, brown feet and claws, nut-coloured wings with purple tips, pale yellow at the back of the neck and head, and emerald colour at the throat, chestnut on the breast and belly. Two horned, downy nets rose from below the tail, that prolonged the long light feathers of admirable fineness, and they completed the whole of this marvellous bird, that the natives have poetically named the "bird of the sun."
But if my wishes were satisfied by the possession of the bird of paradise, the Canadian's were not yet. Happily, about two o'clock, Ned Land brought down a magnificent hog; from the brood of those the natives call "bari-outang." The animal came in time for us to procure real quadruped meat, and he was well received. Ned Land was very proud of his shot. The hog, hit by the electric ball, fell stone dead. The Canadian skinned and cleaned it properly, after having taken half a dozen cutlets, destined to furnish us with a grilled repast in the evening. Then the hunt was resumed, which was still more marked by Ned and Conseil's exploits.
Indeed, the two friends, beating the bushes, roused a herd of kangaroos that fled and bounded along on their elastic paws. But these animals did not take to flight so rapidly but what the electric capsule could stop their course.
"Ah, Professor!" cried Ned Land, who was carried away by the delights of the chase, "what excellent game, and stewed, too! What a supply for the _Nautilus!_ Two! three! five down! And to think that we shall eat that flesh, and that the idiots on board shall not have a crumb!" I think that, in the excess of his joy, the Canadian, if he had not talked so much, would have killed them all. But he contented himself with a single dozen of these interesting marsupians. These animals were small. They were a species of those "kangaroo rabbitss" that live habitually in the hollows of trees, and whose speed is extreme; but they are moderately fat, and furnish, at least, estimable food. We were very satisfied with the results of the hunt. Happy Ned proposed to return to this enchanting island the next day, for he wished to depopulate it of all the eatable quadrupeds. But he had reckoned without his host.
At six o'clock in the evening we had regained the shore; our boat was moored to the usual place. The Nautilus, like a long rock, emerged from the waves two miles from the beach. Ned Land, without waiting, occupied himself about the important dinner business. He understood all about cooking well. The "bari-outang," grilled on the coals, soon scented the air with a delicious odour.
Indeed, the dinner was excellent. Two wood-pigeons completed this extraordinary menu. The sago pasty, the artocarpus bread, some mangoes, half a dozen pineapples, and the liquor fermented from some coco-nuts, overjoyed us. I even think that my worthy companions' ideas had not all the plainness desirable.
"Suppose we do not return to the Nautilus this evening?" said
Conseil.
"Suppose we never return?" added Ned Land.
Just then a stone fell at our feet and cut short the harpooner's proposition.
We looked at the edge of the forest without rising, my hand stopping in the action of putting it to my mouth, Ned Land's completing its office. "Stones do not fall from the sky," remarked Conseil, "or they would merit the name aerolites."
A second stone, carefully aimed, that made a savoury pigeon's leg fall from Conseil's hand, gave still more weight to his observation. We all three arose, shouldered our guns, and were ready to reply to any attack.
"Are they apes?" cried Ned Land.
"Very nearly-they are savages."
"To the boat!" I said, hurrying to the sea.
It was indeed necessary to beat a retreat, for about twenty natives armed with bows and slings appeared on the skirts of a copse that masked the horizon to the right, hardly a hundred steps from us. Our boat was moored about sixty feet from us. The savages approached us, not running, but making hostile demonstrations. Stones and arrows fell thickly.
Ned Land had not wished to leave his provisions; and, in spite of his imminent danger, his pig on one side and kangaroos on the other, he went tolerably fast. In two minutes we were on the shore. To load the boat with provisions and arms, to push it out to sea, and ship the oars, was the work of an instant. We had not gone two cable-lengths, when a hundred savages, howling and gesticulating, entered the water up to their waists. I watched to see if their apparition would attract some men from the Nautilus on to the platform. But no. The enormous machine, lying off, was absolutely deserted.
Twenty minutes later we were on board. The panels were open. After making the boat fast, we entered into the interior of the Nautilus. I descended to the drawing-room, from whence I heard some chords. Captain Nemo was there, bending over his organ, and plunged in a musical ecstasy.
"Captain!"
He did not hear me.
"Captain!" I said, touching his hand.
He shuddered, and, turning round, said, "Ah! it is you, Professor? Well, have you had a good hunt, have you botanised successfully?" "Yes Captain; but we have unfortunately brought a troop of bipeds, whose vicinity troubles me."
"What bipeds?"
"Savages."
"Savages!" he echoed, ironically. "So you are astonished, Professor, at having set foot on a strange land and finding savages? Savages! where are there not any? Besides, are they worse than others, these whom you call savages?"
"But Captain--"
"How many have you counted?"
"A hundred at least."
"M. Aronnax," replied Captain Nemo, placing his fingers on the organ stops, "when all the natives of Papua are assembled on this shore, the Nautilus will have nothing to fear from their attacks." The Captain's fingers were then running over the keys of the instrument, and I remarked that he touched only the black keys, which gave his melodies an essentially Scotch character. Soon he had forgotten my presence, and had plunged into a reverie that I did not disturb. I went up again on to the platform: night had already fallen; for, in this low latitude, the sun sets rapidly and without twilight. I could only see the island indistinctly; but the numerous fires, lighted on the beach, showed that the natives did not think of leaving it. I was alone for several hours, sometimes thinking of the natives-but without any dread of them, for the imperturbable confidence of the Captain was catching-sometimes forgetting them to admire the splendours of the night in the tropics. My remembrances went to France in the train of those zodiacal stars that would shine in some hours' time. The moon shone in the midst of the constellations of the zenith. The night slipped away without any mischance, the islanders frightened no doubt at the sight of a monster aground in the bay. The panels were open, and would have offered an easy access to the interior of the Nautilus.
At six o'clock in the morning of the 8th January I went up on to the platform. The dawn was breaking. The island soon showed itself through the dissipating fogs, first the shore, then the summits. The natives were there, more numerous than on the day before-five or six hundred perhaps-some of them, profiting by the low water, had come on to the coral, at less than two cable-lengths from the Nautilus. I distinguished them easily; they were true Papuans, with athletic figures, men of good race, large high foreheads, large, but not broad and flat, and white teeth. Their woolly hair, with a reddish tinge, showed off on their black shining bodies like those of the Nubians. From the lobes of their ears, cut and distended, hung chaplets of bones. Most of these savages were naked. Amongst them, I remarked some women, dressed from the hips to knees in quite a crinoline of herbs, that sustained a vegetable waistband. Some chiefs had ornamented their necks with a crescent and collars of glass beads, red and white; nearly all were armed with bows, arrows, and shields and carried on their shoulders a sort of net containing those round stones which they cast from their slings with great skill. One of these chiefs, rather near to the Nautilus, examined it attentively. He was, perhaps, a "mado" of high rank, for he was draped in a mat of banana-leaves, notched round the edges, and set off with brilliant colours.
I could easily have knocked down this native, who was within a short length; but I thought that it was better to wait for real hostile demonstrations. Between Europeans and savages, it is proper for the Europeans to parry sharply, not to attack.
During low water the natives roamed about near the Nautilus, but were not troublesome; I heard them frequently repeat the word "Assai," and by their gestures I understood that they invited me to go on land, an invitation that I declined.
So that, on that day, the boat did not push off, to the great displeasure of Master Land, who could not complete his provisions. This adroit Canadian employed his time in preparing the viands and meat that he had brought off the island. As for the savages, they returned to the shore about eleven o'clock in the morning, as soon as the coral tops began to disappear under the rising tide; but I saw their numbers had increased considerably on the shore. Probably they came from the neighbouring islands, or very likely from Papua. However, I had not seen a single native canoe. Having nothing better to do, I thought of dragging these beautiful limpid waters, under which I saw a profusion of shells, zoophytes, and marine plants. Moreover, it was the last day that the Nautilus would pass in these parts, if it float in open sea the next day, according to Captain Nemo's promise. I therefore called Conseil, who brought me a little light drag, very like those for the oyster fishery. Now to work! For two hours we fished unceasingly, but without bringing up any rarities. The drag was filled with midas-ears, harps, melames, and particularly the most beautiful hammers I have ever seen. We also brought up some sea-slugs, pearl-oysters, and a dozen little turtles that were reserved for the pantry on board.
But just when I expected it least, I put my hand on a wonder, I might say a natural deformity, very rarely met with. Conseil was just dragging, and his net came up filled with divers ordinary shells, when, all at once, he saw me plunge my arm quickly into the net, to draw out a shell, and heard me utter a cry.
"What is the matter, sir?" he asked in surprise. "Has master been bitten?"
"No, my boy; but I would willingly have given a finger for my discovery."
"What discovery?"
"This shell," I said, holding up the object of my triumph. "It is simply an olive porphyry, genus olive, order of the pectinibranchidæ, class of gasteropods, sub-class mollusca." "Yes, Conseil; but, instead of being rolled from right to left, this olive turns from left to right."
"Is it possible?"
"Yes, my boy; it is a left shell."
Shells are all right-handed, with rare exceptions; and, when by chance their spiral is left, amateurs are ready to pay their weight in gold. Conseil and I were absorbed in the contemplation of our treasure, and I was promising myself to enrich the museum with it, when a stone unfortunately thrown by a native struck against, and broke, the precious object in Conseil's hand. I uttered a cry of despair! Conseil took up his gun, and aimed at a savage who was poising his sling at ten yards from him. I would have stopped him, but his blow took effect and broke the bracelet of amulets which encircled the arm of the savage. [Illustration] Conseil seized his gun
"Conseil!" cried I. "Conseil!"
"Well, sir! do you not see that the cannibal has commenced the attack?" "A shell is not worth the life of a man," said I. "Ah! the scoundrel!" cried Conseil; "I would rather he had broken my shoulder!"
Conseil was in earnest, but I was not of his opinion. However, the situation had changed some minutes before, and we had not perceived. A score of canoes surrounded the Nautilus. These canoes, scooped out of the trunk of a tree, long, narrow, well adapted for speed, were balanced by means of a long bamboo pole, which floated on the water. They were managed by skilful, half-naked paddlers, and I watched their advance with some uneasiness. It was evident that these Papuans had already had dealings with the Europeans and knew their ships. But this long iron cylinder anchored in the bay, without masts or chimneys, what could they think of it? Nothing good, for at first they kept at a respectful distance. However, seeing it motionless, by degrees they took courage, and sought to familiarise themselves with it. Now this familiarity was precisely what it was necessary to avoid. Our arms, which were noiseless, could only produce a moderate effect on the savages, who have little respect for aught but blustering things. The thunderbolt without the reverberations of thunder would frighten man but little, though the danger lies in the lightning, not in the noise. At this moment the canoes approached the Nautilus, and a shower of arrows alighted on her.
I went down to the saloon, but found no one there. I ventured to knock at the door that opened into the Captain's room. "Come in," was the answer.
I entered, and found Captain Nemo deep in algebraical calculations of
_x_ and other quantities.
"I am disturbing you," said I, for courtesy's sake. "That is true, M. Aronnax," replied the Captain; "but I think you have serious reasons for wishing to see me?"
"Very grave ones; the natives are surrounding us in their canoes, and in a few minutes we shall certainly be attacked by many hundreds of savages."
"Ah!" said Captain Nemo quietly, "they are come with their canoes?"
"Yes, sir."
"Well, sir, we must close the hatches."
"Exactly, and I came to say to you--"
"Nothing can be more simple," said Captain Nemo. And, pressing an electric button, he transmitted an order to the ship's crew. "It is all done, sir," said he, after some moments. "The pinnace is ready, and the hatches are closed. You do not fear, I imagine, that these gentlemen could stave in walls on which the balls of your frigate have had no effect?"
"No, Captain; but a danger still exists."
"What is that, sir?"
"It is that to-morrow, at about this hour, we must open the hatches to renew the air of the Nautilus. Now, if, at this moment, the Papuans should occupy the platform, I do not see how you could prevent them from entering."
"Then, sir, you suppose that they will board us?"
"I am certain of it."
"Well, sir, let them come. I see no reason for hindering them. After all, these Papuans are poor creatures, and I am unwilling that my visit to the island should cost the life of a single one of these wretches." Upon that I was going away; But Captain Nemo detained me, and asked me to sit down by him. He questioned me with interest about our excursions on shore, and our hunting; and seemed not to understand the craving for meat that possessed the Canadian. Then the conversation turned on various subjects, and, without being more communicative, Captain Nemo showed himself more amiable.
Amongst other things, we happened to speak of the situation of the Nautilus, run aground in exactly the same spot in this strait where Dumont d'Urville was nearly lost. Apropos of this: "This D'Urville was one of your great sailors," said the Captain to me, "one of your most intelligent navigators. He is the Captain Cook of you Frenchmen. Unfortunate man of science, after having braved the icebergs of the South Pole, the coral reefs of Oceania, the cannibals of the Pacific, to perish miserably in a railway train! If this energetic man could have reflected during the last moments of his life, what must have been uppermost in his last thoughts, do you suppose?" So speaking, Captain Nemo seemed moved, and his emotion gave me a better opinion of him. Then, chart in hand, we reviewed the travels of the French navigator, his voyages of circumnavigation, his double detention at the South Pole, which led to the discovery of Adelaide and Louis Philippe, and fixing the hydrographical bearings of the principal islands of Oceania.
"That which your D'Urville has done on the surface of the seas," said Captain Nemo, "that have I done under them, and more easily, more completely than he. The Astrolabe and the Zelee, incessantly tossed about by the hurricane, could not be worth the Nautilus, quiet repository of labour that she is, truly motionless in the midst of the waters.
"To-morrow," added the Captain, rising, "to-morrow, at twenty minutes to three p.m., the Nautilus shall float, and leave the Strait of
Torres uninjured."
Having curtly pronounced these words, Captain Nemo bowed slightly. This was to dismiss me, and I went back to my room.
There I found Conseil, who wished to know the result of my interview with the Captain.
"My boy," said I, "when I feigned to believe that his Nautilus was threatened by the natives of Papua, the Captain answered me very sarcastically. I have but one thing to say to you: Have confidence in him, and go to sleep in peace."
"Have you no need of my services, sir?"
"No, my friend. What is Ned Land doing?"
"If you will excuse me, sir," answered Conseil, "friend Ned is busy making a kangaroo-pie which will be a marvel."
I remained alone and went to bed, but slept indifferently. I heard the noise of the savages, who stamped on the platform, uttering deafening cries. The night passed thus, without disturbing the ordinary repose of the crew. The presence of these cannibals affected them no more than the soldiers of a masked battery care for the ants that crawl over its front.
At six in the morning I rose. The hatches had not been opened. The inner air was not renewed, but the reservoirs, filled ready for any emergency, were now resorted to, and discharged several cubic feet of oxygen into the exhausted atmosphere of the Nautilus. I worked in my room till noon, without having seen Captain Nemo, even for an instant. On board no preparations for departure were visible. I waited still some time, then went into the large saloon. The clock marked half-past two. In ten minutes it would be high-tide: and, if Captain Nemo had not made a rash promise, the Nautilus would be immediately detached. If not, many months would pass ere she could leave her bed of coral.
However, some warning vibrations began to be felt in the vessel. I heard the keel grating against the rough calcareous bottom of the coral reef.
At five-and-twenty minutes to three, Captain Nemo appeared in the saloon.
"We are going to start," said he.
"Ah!" replied I.
"I have given the order to open the hatches."
"And the Papuans?"
"The Papuans?" answered Captain Nemo, slightly shrugging his shoulders. "Will they not come inside the _Nautilus?_"
"How?"
"Only by leaping over the hatches you have opened." "M. Aronnax," quietly answered Captain Nemo, "they will not enter the hatches of the Nautilus in that way, even if they were open."
I looked at the Captain.
"You do not understand?" said he.
"Hardly."
"Well, come and you will see."
I directed my steps towards the central staircase. There Ned Land and Conseil were slyly watching some of the ship's crew, who were opening the hatches, while cries of rage and fearful vociferations resounded outside.
The port lids were pulled down outside. Twenty horrible faces appeared. But the first native who placed his hand on the stair-rail, struck from behind by some invisible force, I know not what, fled, uttering the most fearful cries and making the wildest contortions. Ten of his companions followed him. They met with the same fate. Conseil was in ecstasy. Ned Land, carried away by his violent instincts, rushed on to the staircase. But the moment he seized the rail with both hands, he, in his turn, was overthrown. "I am struck by a thunderbolt," cried he, with an oath. This explained all. It was no rail; but a metallic cable charged with electricity from the deck communicating with the platform. Whoever touched it felt a powerful shock-and this shock would have been mortal if Captain Nemo had discharged into the conductor the whole force of the current. It might truly be said that between his assailants and himself he had stretched a network of electricity which none could pass with impunity.
Meanwhile, the exasperated Papuans had beaten a retreat paralysed with terror. As for us, half laughing, we consoled and rubbed the unfortunate Ned Land, who swore like one possessed. But at this moment the Nautilus, raised by the last waves of the tide, quitted her coral bed exactly at the fortieth minute fixed by the Captain. Her screw swept the waters slowly and majestically. Her speed increased gradually, and, sailing on the surface of the ocean, she quitted safe and sound the dangerous passes of the Straits of Torres.
The following day 10th January, the Nautilus continued her course between two seas, but with such remarkable speed that I could not estimate it at less than thirty-five miles an hour. The rapidity of her screw was such that I could neither follow nor count its revolutions. When I reflected that this marvellous electric agent, after having afforded motion, heat, and light to the Nautilus, still protected her from outward attack, and transformed her into an ark of safety which no profane hand might touch without being thunderstricken, my admiration was unbounded, and from the structure it extended to the engineer who had called it into existence.
Our course was directed to the west, and on the 11th of January we doubled Cape Wessel, situation in 135° long. and 10° S. lat., which forms the east point of the Gulf of Carpentaria. The reefs were still numerous, but more equalised, and marked on the chart with extreme precision. The Nautilus easily avoided the breakers of Money to port and the Victoria reefs to starboard, placed at 130° long. and on the 10th parallel, which we strictly followed.
On the 13th of January, Captain Nemo arrived in the Sea of Timor, and recognised the island of that name in 122° long.
From this point the direction of the Nautilus inclined towards the south-west. Her head was set for the Indian Ocean. Where would the fancy of Captain Nemo carry us next? Would he return to the coast of Asia or would he approach again the shores of Europe? Improbable conjectures both, to a man who fled from inhabited continents. Then would he descend to the south? Was he going to double the Cape of Good Hope, then Cape Horn, and finally go as far as the Antarctic pole? Would he come back at last to the Pacific, where his Nautilus could sail free and independently? Time would show.
After having skirted the sands of Cartier, of Hibernia, Seringapatam, and Scott, last efforts of the solid against the liquid element, on the 14th of January we lost sight of land altogether. The speed of the Nautilus was considerably abated, and with irregular course she sometimes swam in the bosom of the waters, sometimes floated on their surface.
During this period of the voyage, Captain Nemo made some interesting experiments on the varied temperature of the sea, in different beds. Under ordinary conditions these observations are made by means of rather complicated instruments, and with somewhat doubtful results, by means of thermometrical sounding-leads, the glasses often breaking under the pressure of the water, or an apparatus grounded on the variations of the resistance of metals to the electric currents. Results so obtained could not be correctly calculated. On the contrary, Captain Nemo went himself to test the temperature in the depths of the sea, and his thermometer, placed in communication with the different sheets of water, gave him the required degree immediately and accurately.
It was thus that, either by overloading her reservoirs or by descending obliquely by means of her inclined planes, the Nautilus successively attained the depth of three, four, five, seven, nine, and ten thousand yards, and the definite result of this experience was that the sea preserved an average temperature of four degrees and a half at a depth of five thousand fathoms under all latitudes.
On the 16th of January, the Nautilus seemed becalmed only a few yards beneath the surface of the waves. Her electric apparatus remained inactive and her motionless screw left her to drift at the mercy of the currents. I supposed that the crew was occupied with interior repairs, rendered necessary by the violence of the mechanical movements of the machine.
My companions and I then witnessed a curious spectacle. The hatches of the saloon were open, and, as the beacon light of the Nautilus was not in action, a dim obscurity reigned in the midst of the waters. I observed the state of the sea, under these conditions, and the largest fish appeared to me no more than scarcely defined shadows, when the Nautilus found herself suddenly transported into full light. I thought at first that the beacon had been lighted, and was casting its electric radiance into the liquid mass. I was mistaken, and after a rapid survey perceived my error.
The Nautilus floated in the midst of a phosphorescent bed which, in this obscurity, became quite dazzling. It was produced by myriads of luminous animalculae, whose brilliancy was increased as they glided over the metallic hull of the vessel. I was surprised by lightning in the midst of these luminous sheets, as though they had been rivulets of lead melted in an ardent furnace or metallic masses brought to a white heat, so that, by force of contrast, certain portions of light appeared to cast a shade in the midst of the general ignition, from which all shade seemed banished. No; this was not the calm irradiation of our ordinary lightning. There was unusual life and vigour: this was truly living light!
In reality, it was an infinite agglomeration of coloured infusoria, of veritable globules of jelly, provided with a threadlike tentacle, and of which as many as twenty-five thousand have been counted in less than two cubic half-inches of water.
During several hours the Nautilus floated in these brilliant waves, and our admiration increased as we watched the marine monsters disporting themselves like salamanders. I saw there in the midst of this fire that burns not the swift and elegant porpoise (the indefatigable clown of the ocean), and some swordfish ten feet long, those prophetic heralds of the hurricane whose formidable sword would now and then strike the glass of the saloon. Then appeared the smaller fish, the balista, the leaping mackerel, wolf-thorn-tails, and a hundred others which striped the luminous atmosphere as they swam. This dazzling spectacle was enchanting! Perhaps some atmospheric condition increased the intensity of this phenomenon. Perhaps some storm agitated the surface of the waves. But at this depth of some yards, the Nautilus was unmoved by its fury and reposed peacefully in still water.
So we progressed, incessantly charmed by some new marvel. The days passed rapidly away, and I took no account of them. Ned, according to habit, tried to vary the diet on board. Like snails, we were fixed to our shells, and I declare it is easy to lead a snail's life. Thus this life seemed easy and natural, and we thought no longer of the life we led on land; but something happened to recall us to the strangeness of our situation.
On the 18th of January, the Nautilus was in 105° long. and 15° S. lat. The weather was threatening, the sea rough and rolling. There was a strong east wind. The barometer, which had been going down for some days, foreboded a coming storm. I went up on to the platform just as the second lieutenant was taking the measure of the horary angles, and waited, according to habit till the daily phrase was said. But on this day it was exchanged for another phrase not less incomprehensible. Almost directly, I saw Captain Nemo appear with a glass, looking towards the horizon.
For some minutes he was immovable, without taking his eye off the point of observation. Then he lowered his glass and exchanged a few words with his lieutenant. The latter seemed to be a victim to some emotion that he tried in vain to repress. Captain Nemo, having more command over himself, was cool. He seemed, too, to be making some objections to which the lieutenant replied by formal assurances. At least I concluded so by the difference of their tones and gestures. For myself, I had looked carefully in the direction indicated without seeing anything. The sky and water were lost in the clear line of the horizon. However, Captain Nemo walked from one end of the platform to the other, without looking at me, perhaps without seeing me. His step was firm, but less regular than usual. He stopped sometimes, crossed his arms, and observed the sea. What could he be looking for on that immense expanse?
The Nautilus was then some hundreds of miles from the nearest coast. The lieutenant had taken up the glass and examined the horizon steadfastly, going and coming, stamping his foot and showing more nervous agitation than his superior officer. Besides, this mystery must necessarily be solved, and before long; for, upon an order from Captain Nemo, the engine, increasing its propelling power, made the screw turn more rapidly.
Just then the lieutenant drew the Captain's attention again. The latter stopped walking and directed his glass towards the place indicated. He looked long. I felt very much puzzled, and descended to the drawing-room, and took out an excellent telescope that I generally used. Then, leaning on the cage of the watch-light that jutted out from the front of the platform, set myself to look over all the line of the sky and sea.
But my eye was no sooner applied to the glass than it was quickly snatched out of my hands.
I turned round. Captain Nemo was before me, but I did not know him. His face was transfigured. His eyes flashed sullenly; his teeth were set; his stiff body, clenched fists, and head shrunk between his shoulders, betrayed the violent agitation that pervaded his whole frame. He did not move. My glass, fallen from his hands, had rolled at his feet. Had I unwittingly provoked this fit of anger? Did this incomprehensible person imagine that I had discovered some forbidden secret? No; I was not the object of this hatred, for he was not looking at me; his eye was steadily fixed upon the impenetrable point of the horizon. At last Captain Nemo recovered himself. His agitation subsided. He addressed some words in a foreign language to his lieutenant, then turned to me. "M. Aronnax," he said, in rather an imperious tone, "I require you to keep one of the conditions that bind you to me."
"What is it, Captain?"
"You must be confined, with your companions, until I think fit to release you."
"You are the master," I replied, looking steadily at him. "But may I
ask you one question?"
"None, sir."
There was no resisting this imperious command, it would have been useless. I went down to the cabin occupied by Ned Land and Conseil, and told them the Captain's determination. You may judge how this communication was received by the Canadian.
But there was not time for altercation. Four of the crew waited at the door, and conducted us to that cell where we had passed our first night on board the Nautilus.
Ned Land would have remonstrated, but the door was shut upon him. "Will master tell me what this means?" asked Conseil. I told my companions what had passed. They were as much astonished as I, and equally at a loss how to account for it.
Meanwhile, I was absorbed in my own reflections, and could think of nothing but the strange fear depicted in the Captain's countenance. I was utterly at a loss to account for it, when my cogitations were disturbed by these words from Ned Land:
"Hallo! breakfast is ready."
And indeed the table was laid. Evidently Captain Nemo had given this order at the same time that he had hastened the speed of the Nautilus.
"Will master permit me to make a recommendation?" asked Conseil.
"Yes, my boy."
"Well, it is that master breakfasts. It is prudent, for we do not know what may happen."
"You are right, Conseil."
"Unfortunately," said Ned Land, "they have only given us the ship's fare."
"Friend Ned," asked Conseil, "what would you have said if the breakfast had been entirely forgotten?"
This argument cut short the harpooner's recriminations. We sat down to table. The meal was eaten in silence. Just then the luminous globe that lighted the cell went out, and left us in total darkness. Ned Land was soon asleep, and what astonished me was that Conseil went off into a heavy slumber. I was thinking what could have caused his irresistible drowsiness, when I felt my brain becoming stupefied. In spite of my efforts to keep my eyes open, they would close. A painful suspicion seized me. Evidently soporific substances had been mixed with the food we had just taken. Imprisonment was not enough to conceal Captain Nemo's projects from us, sleep was more necessary. I then heard the panels shut. The undulations of the sea, which caused a slight rolling motion, ceased. Had the Nautilus quitted the surface of the ocean? Had it gone back to the motionless bed of water? I tried to resist sleep. It was impossible. My breathing grew weak. I felt a mortal cold freeze my stiffened and half-paralysed limbs. My eye lids, like leaden caps, fell over my eyes. I could not raise them; a morbid sleep, full of hallucinations, bereft me of my being. Then the visions disappeared, and left me in complete insensibility.
The next day I woke with my head singularly clear. To my great surprise, I was in my own room. My companions, no doubt, had been reinstated in their cabin, without having perceived it any more than I. Of what had passed during the night they were as ignorant as I was, and to penetrate this mystery I only reckoned upon the chances of the future.
I then thought of quitting my room. Was I free again or a prisoner? Quite free. I opened the door, went to the half-deck, went up the central stairs. The panels, shut the evening before, were open. I went on to the platform.
Ned Land and Conseil waited there for me. I questioned them; they knew nothing. Lost in a heavy sleep in which they had been totally unconscious, they had been astonished at finding themselves in their cabin.
As for the Nautilus, it seemed quiet and mysterious as ever. It floated on the surface of the waves at a moderate pace. Nothing seemed changed on board.
The second lieutenant then came on to the platform, and gave the usual order below.
As for Captain Nemo, he did not appear.
Of the people on board, I only saw the impassive steward, who served me with his usual dumb regularity.
About two o'clock, I was in the drawing-room, busied in arranging my notes, when the Captain opened the door and appeared. I bowed. He made a slight inclination in return, without speaking. I resumed my work, hoping that he would perhaps give me some explanation of the events of the preceding night. He made none. I looked at him. He seemed fatigued; his heavy eyes had not been refreshed by sleep; his face looked very sorrowful. He walked to and fro, sat down and got up again, took a chance book, put it down, consulted his instruments without taking his habitual notes, and seemed restless and uneasy. At last, he came up to me, and said:
"Are you a doctor, M. Aronnax?"
I so little expected such a question that I stared some time at him without answering.
"Are you a doctor?" he repeated. "Several of your colleagues have studied medicine."
"Well," said I, "I am a doctor and resident surgeon to the hospital. I practised several years before entering the museum."
"Very well, sir."
My answer had evidently satisfied the Captain. But, not knowing what he would say next, I waited for other questions, reserving my answers according to circumstances.
"M. Aronnax, will you consent to prescribe for one of my men?" he asked.
"Is he ill?"
"Yes."
"I am ready to follow you."
"Come, then."
I own my heart beat, I do not know why. I saw certain connection between the illness of one of the crew and the events of the day before; and this mystery interested me at least as much as the sick man.
Captain Nemo conducted me to the poop of the Nautilus, and took me into a cabin situated near the sailors' quarters. There, on a bed, lay a man about forty years of age, with a resolute expression of countenance, a true type of an Anglo-Saxon. I leant over him. He was not only ill, he was wounded. His head, swathed in bandages covered with blood, lay on a pillow. I undid the bandages, and the wounded man looked at me with his large eyes and gave no sign of pain as I did it. It was a horrible wound. The skull, shattered by some deadly weapon, left the brain exposed, which was much injured. Clots of blood had formed in the bruised and broken mass, in colour like the dregs of wine.
There was both contusion and suffusion of the brain. His breathing was slow, and some spasmodic movements of the muscles agitated his face. I felt his pulse. It was intermittent. The extremities of the body were growing cold already, and I saw death must inevitably ensue. After dressing the unfortunate man's wounds, I readjusted the bandages on his head, and turned to Captain Nemo.
"What caused this wound?" I asked.
"What does it signify?" he replied, evasively. "A shock has broken one of the levers of the engine, which struck myself. But your opinion as to his state?"
I hesitated before giving it.
"You may speak," said the Captain. "This man does not understand
French."
I gave a last look at the wounded man.
"He will be dead in two hours."
"Can nothing save him?"
"Nothing."
Captain Nemo's hand contracted, and some tears glistened in his eyes, which I thought incapable of shedding any.
For some moments I still watched the dying man, whose life ebbed slowly. His pallor increased under the electric light that was shed over his death-bed. I looked at his intelligent forehead, furrowed with premature wrinkles, produced probably by misfortune and sorrow. I tried to learn the secret of his life from the last words that escaped his lips.
"You can go now, M. Aronnax," said the Captain.
I left him in the dying man's cabin, and returned to my room much affected by this scene. During the whole day, I was haunted by uncomfortable suspicions, and at night I slept badly, and between my broken dreams I fancied I heard distant sighs like the notes of a funeral psalm. Were they the prayers of the dead, murmured in that language that I could not understand?
The next morning I went on to the bridge. Captain Nemo was there before me. As soon as he perceived me he came to me.
"Professor, will it be convenient to you to make a submarine excursion to-day?"
"With my companions?" I asked.
"If they like."
"We obey your orders, Captain."
"Will you be so good then as to put on your cork jackets?" It was not a question of dead or dying. I rejoined Ned Land and Conseil, and told them of Captain Nemo's proposition. Conseil hastened to accept it, and this time the Canadian seemed quite willing to follow our example.
It was eight o'clock in the morning. At half-past eight we were equipped for this new excursion, and provided with two contrivances for light and breathing. The double door was open; and, accompanied by Captain Nemo, who was followed by a dozen of the crew, we set foot, at a depth of about thirty feet, on the solid bottom on which the Nautilus rested.
A slight declivity ended in an uneven bottom, at fifteen fathoms depth. This bottom differed entirely from the one I had visited on my first excursion under the waters of the Pacific Ocean. Here, there was no fine sand, no submarine prairies, no sea-forest. I immediately recognised that marvellous region in which, on that day, the Captain did the honours to us. It was the coral kingdom.
The light produced a thousand charming varieties, playing in the midst of the branches that were so vividly coloured. I seemed to see the membraneous and cylindrical tubes tremble beneath the undulation of the waters. I was tempted to gather their fresh petals, ornamented with delicate tentacles, some just blown, the others budding, while a small fish, swimming swiftly, touched them slightly, like flights of birds. But if my hand approached these living flowers, these animated, sensitive plants, the whole colony took alarm. The white petals re-entered their red cases, the flowers faded as I looked, and the bush changed into a block of stony knobs.
Chance had thrown me just by the most precious specimens of the zoophyte. This coral was more valuable than that found in the Mediterranean, on the coasts of France, Italy and Barbary. Its tints justified the poetical names of "Flower of Blood," and "Froth of Blood," that trade has given to its most beautiful productions. Coral is sold for £20 per ounce; and in this place the watery beds would make the fortunes of a company of coral-divers. This precious matter, often confused with other polypi, formed then the inextricable plots called "macciota," and on which I noticed several beautiful specimens of pink coral.
But soon the bushes contract, and the arborisations increase. Real petrified thickets, long joints of fantastic architecture, were disclosed before us. Captain Nemo placed himself under a dark gallery, where by a slight declivity we reached a depth of a hundred yards. The light from our lamps produced sometimes magical effects, following the rough outlines of the natural arches and pendants disposed like lustres, that were tipped with points of fire.
At last, after walking two hours, we had attained a depth of about three hundred yards, that is to say, the extreme limit on which coral begins to form. But there was no isolated bush, nor modest brushwood, at the bottom of lofty trees. It was an immense forest of large mineral vegetations, enormous petrified trees, united by garlands of elegant sea-bindweed, all adorned with clouds and reflections. We passed freely under their high branches, lost in the shade of the waves. Captain Nemo had stopped. I and my companions halted, and, turning round, I saw his men were forming a semi-circle round their chief. Watching attentively, I observed that four of them carried on their shoulders an object of an oblong shape.
We occupied, in this place, the centre of a vast glade surrounded by the lofty foliage of the submarine forest. Our lamps threw over this place a sort of clear twilight that singularly elongated the shadows on the ground. At the end of the glade the darkness increased, and was only relieved by little sparks reflected by the points of coral. Ned Land and Conseil were near me. We watched, and I thought I was going to witness a strange scene. On observing the ground, I saw that it was raised in certain places by slight excrescences encrusted with limy deposits, and disposed with a regularity that betrayed the hand of man.
In the midst of the glade, on a pedestal of rocks roughly piled up, stood a cross of coral that extended its long arms that one might have thought were made of petrified blood. Upon a sign from Captain Nemo one of the men advanced; and at some feet from the cross he began to dig a hole with a pickaxe that he took from his belt. I understood all! This glade was a cemetery, this hole a tomb, this oblong object the body of the man who had died in the night! The Captain and his men had come to bury their companion in this general resting-place, at the bottom of this inaccessible ocean!
The grave was being dug slowly; the fish fled on all sides while their retreat was being thus disturbed; I heard the strokes of the pickaxe, which sparkled when it hit upon some flint lost at the bottom of the waters. The hole was soon large and deep enough to receive the body. Then the bearers approached; the body, enveloped in a tissue of white linen, was lowered into the damp grave. Captain Nemo, with his arms crossed on his breast, and all the friends of him who had loved them, knelt in prayer.
"So, as I said he would, this man died in the night?"
"Yes, M. Aronnax."
"And he rests now, near his companions, in the coral cemetery?" "Yes, forgotten by all else, but not by us. We dug the grave, and the polypi undertake to seal our dead for eternity." And, burying his face quickly in his hands, he tried in vain to suppress a sob. Then he added: "Our peaceful cemetery is there, some hundred feet below the surface of the waves."
"Your dead sleep quietly, at least, Captain, out of the reach of sharks."
"Yes, sir, of sharks and men," gravely replied the Captain.
As compared to a rigid, unrotating solid, where every bit of the thing has to be moving in the same direction at the same speed, each bit of a fluid might be moving differently. One way to model this is to use a vector field representing velocity. For any given \( (x, y) \) coordinate, this field will tell you the velocity of the fluid at that point.
A nice way to get an intuition about what a given field looks like is to sample the function in a grid of points, then draw arrows starting at each grid point whose size and orientation are dictated by the value of the function at that point. For the purposes of this post, we're always going to be working over the domain \( x \in [-1, 1] \), \( y \in [-1, 1] \).
For instance, here's a very simple field \( \vec u(x, y) = (1, 0) \) representing everything moving at a constant speed to the right.
And here's a more interesting one \( \vec u(x, y) = (x, y) \) where things move away from the origin, increasing in speed the farther away from the origin they are.
We're going to play with this one, \( \vec u(x, y) = \left( \sin (2 \pi y), \sin (2 \pi x) \right) \), since it creates some interesting visual results once we start making the fluid move accordingly.
For a more thorough introduction to vector fields, check out the Introduction to Vector Fields video on Khan Academy. The rest of the videos on multivariate calculus might prove useful for understanding concepts in fluid flow too.
Now then, let's get things moving.
Advection is the transfer of a property from one place to another due to the motion of the fluid. If you've got some black dye in some water, and the water is moving to the right, then surprise surprise, the black dye moves right.
If the fluid is moving in a more complex manner, that black dye will get pulled through the liquid in a more complex manner.
Before we dive into how advection works, we need to talk a bit about the format of the data underlying these simulations.
The simulation consist of two fields: color and velocity. Each field is represented by a two dimensional grid. For simplicity, we use the same dimensions as the output pixel grid.
Previously, I described the velocity field as an analytical function \( \vec u(x, y) \). In practice, that analytical function is only used to initialize the grid values.
The simulation runs by stepping forward bit-by-bit in time, with the state of the color and velocity grids depending only on the state of the color and velocity grids from the previous time step. We'll use \( \vec u(\vec p, t) \) to represent the velocity grid at 2d position \( \vec p \) and time \( t \), and \( \vec c(\vec p, t) \) to represent the color in the same manner.
So how do we move forward in time? Let's just talk about how the color field changes for now. If we consider each grid point as a little particle in the fluid, then one approach is to update the color of the fluid where that particle will be, one time step in the future.
In order to run these simulations in real-time at high resolution, we want to implement them on the GPU. It turns out that this method of updating the value at the new location of the particle is difficult to implement on the GPU.
First, the position we want to write, \( \vec p + \vec u(\vec p, t) \Delta t \) might not lie on a grid point, so we'd have to distribute the impact of the write across the surrounding grid points. Second, many of our imaginary particles might end up in the same place, meaning we need to analyze the entire grid before we decide what the new values of each grid point might be.
So, instead of figuring out where our imaginary particles at the grid points go to , we'll figure out where they came from in order to calculate the next time step.
With this scheme, we only need to write to a single grid point, and we don't need to consider the contributions of imaginary particles coming from multiple different places.
The last teensy hurdle is figuring out the value of \( \vec c(\vec p - \vec u(\vec p, t) \Delta t, t ) \), since \( \vec p - \vec u(\vec p, t) \) might not be at a grid point. We can hop this hurdle using bilinear interpolation on the surrounding 4 grid points (the ones linked by the dashed grey rectangle above).
Barring a bizarre sequence of perfectly aligned fans underneath the liquid, there's no reason why the velocity field wouldn't change over time. Just as black ink would move through the fluid, so too will the velocity field itself! Just as we can advect \( \vec c \) through \( \vec u \), we can also advect \( \vec u \) through itself!
Intuitively you can think of it this way: a particle moving in a certain direction will continue moving in that direction, even after it's moved.
Since we're storing velocity in a grid just like we did with color, we can use the exact same routine to advect velocity through itself. Below, watch the velocity change over time, with an initial velocity field of \( \vec u = (1, \sin(2 \pi y)) \).
See how the changes you make by dragging propagate through space via  advection.
If you tried playing around with this, and saw a bunch of weird hard edges and might've thought to yourself "I don't think fluids work like that…", you'd be right. We're missing an important ingredient, but before we look at the solution, let's take a closer look at the problem.
Something about the velocity field below makes this intuitively not feel like a fluid.  Fluids just don't behave like this.
Same problem with this one…
If you look at where the arrows are pointing in each of the above 2 simulations, you'll see that there are spots where the all the arrows point away from that spot, and others where all the arrows point toward that spot.  Assuming the volume of the liquid is staying constant, the density of the fluid has to be changing for such a velocity field to be possible.
Water is roughly incompressible. That means that at every spot, you have to have the same amount of fluid entering that spot as leaving it.
Mathematically, we can represent this fact by saying a field is divergence-free . The divergence of a velocity field \( \vec u \), indicated with \( div(\vec u) \) or \( \nabla \cdot \vec u \), is a measure of how much net stuff is entering or leaving a given spot in the field. For our 2D velocity field, it's defined like this:
The first of the two not-very-fluidy fields above has an equation \( \vec u(x, y) = (x, y) \). Taking the divergence, we find:
This positive value tells us that, in all places, more stuff is leaving that point than entering it. In physical terms, this means that the density is decreasing uniformly everywhere.
The other not-very-fluidy field has an equation \( \vec u(x, y) = \sin(2 \pi x), 0) \). If we look at its divergence, we see:
Which tells us that in some places, density is increasing (where \( \nabla \cdot \vec u < 0 \)), and in others, density is decreasing (where \( \nabla \cdot \vec u > 0 \)).
Doing the same operation on the more fluidy looking swirly velocity field \( \vec u = (\sin ( 2 \pi y), \sin ( 2 \pi x ) \) that you saw in the section about advection, we discover \( \nabla \cdot \vec u = 0 \).
An incompressible fluid will have a divergence of zero everywhere. So, if we want our simulated fluid to look kind of like a real fluid, we better make sure it's divergence-free.
Since our velocity field undergoes advection and can be influenced by clicking and dragging around the fluid, having an initially divergence-free velocity field isn't enough to guarantee that the field will continue to be divergence-free. For example, if we take our swirly simulation and start advecting the velocity field through itself, we end up with something divergent:
So we need a way of taking a divergent field and making it divergence-free. To understand what force makes that happen in the real world, we need to talk about some honest-to-goodness physics.
The Navier-Stokes equations describe the motion of fluids. Here are the Navier-Stokes equations for incompressible fluid flow:
Where \( \vec u \) is the velocity field, \( \rho \) is density, \( p \) is pressure, \( \nu \) is the kinematic viscosity, and \( \vec F \) is external forces acting upon the fluid.
Since we're pretending the viscosity of our fluid is zero, we can drop the \( \nu \) term in the first equation. In our simple simulation, external forces are only applied by dragging the mouse, so we'll ignore that term for now, opting to allow it to influence the velocity field directly.
Dropping those terms, we're left with the following:
We can expand this to its partial derivative form, expanding vector components to leave us with only scalar variables.
Remembering that these fields are all functions on \( (x, y, t) \), we can approximate the partial derivatives with finite differences . For instance, we can approximate the partial derivative of \( u_x \) with respect to \( t \) like so:
Because the procedure ends up being the same for both components, we'll focus on only the \( x \) component here. Applying finite differences to all of the partial derivatives, we have this:
Ultimately what we want is \( \vec u(x, y, t + \Delta t) \), which will tell us, for a given point, what the velocity will be at the next time step. So let's solve for that by rearranging the big long formula above:
If you look at the first three terms in this expression, what does it look like they conceptually represent? It looks like they represent the next velocity after we've taken into account changes due to the motion of the fluid itself. That sounds an awful like advection as discussed earlier. In fact, it will work quite well if we substitute the velocity field after it's undergone advection. We'll call the advected velocity field \( \vec u ^ a \). So now we have:
So after all of that, we have an equation that relates the velocity field at the next time tick to the current velocity field after it's undergone advection, followed by application of pressure.
We know that a divergence-free field that undergoes advection isn't necessarily still divergence-free, and yet we know that the Navier-Stokes equations for impressible flow represent divergence-free velocity fields, so therefore we have our answer about what in nature prevents the velocity field from becoming divergent: pressure!
Now that we have an equation that relates \( \vec u \) to \( p \). This is where the math gets messy. We start from the second Navier-Stokes equation for incompressible flow, applied at time \( t + \Delta t \), and apply finite differences again:
Here, we can substitute our equations for \( \vec u \) expressed in terms of \( \vec u ^ a \) and \( p \) to get this monster:
Rearranging to have all of the \( p \) terms on the left and all the \( \vec u ^ a \) terms on the right, and multiplying both sides by \( 2 \epsilon \), we have:
Note: the above expression is a scalar expression, despite being laid out in a somewhat vector-y form.
At this point, it's helpful to remember that, for the purposes of the simulation, we're not interested in knowing the value of \( p \) everywhere: we only care about knowing its value at enough places to calculate the value of the velocities at the grid points. To meet that end, we can similarly calculate \( p \) on the grid. To accomplish this, we can make \( \epsilon \) the distance between adjacent grid cells.
The above equation yields a new equation for every \( (x, y) \) of a grid point we substitute. For the purposes of discussion, let's assume that the gap between adjacent cells is 0.1 units, so \( \epsilon = 0.1 \). Let's examine what the equation yields for \( (x, y) = (0.3, 0.7) \).
$$\begin{aligned} -\frac{\Delta t}{2 \epsilon \rho} \left(  \begin{matrix}  4 p(0.3, 0.7, t) \\ -p(0.3 + 2(0.1), 0.7, t) \\ -p(0.3 - 2(0.1), 0.7, t) \\ -p(0.3, 0.7 + 2(0.1), t) \\ -p(0.3, 0.7 - 2(0.1), t) \end{matrix}  \right) & =  \begin{matrix}  u^a_x(0.3 + 0.1, 0.7, t) \\ -u^a_x(0.3 - 0.1, 0.7, t) \\ +u^a_y(0.3, 0.7 + 0.1, t) \\ -u^a_y(0.3, 0.7 - 0.1, t) \end{matrix}  \\  \frac{\Delta t}{2 \epsilon \rho} \left(  \begin{matrix}  4 p(0.3, 0.7, t) \\ -p(0.5, 0.7, t) \\ -p(0.1, 0.7, t) \\ -p(0.3, 0.9, t) \\ -p(0.3, 0.5, t) \end{matrix}  \right) & =  \begin{matrix}  u^a_x(0.4, 0.7, t) \\ -u^a_x(0.2, 0.7, t) \\ +u^a_y(0.3, 0.8, t) \\ -u^a_y(0.3, 0.6, t) \end{matrix}  \end{aligned}$$
All the values on the right hand side of this equation are known, and on the left we have 5 unknowns: the value of \( p \) at 5 different grid locations.
If we repeat this process and evaluate \( (x, y) \) at every grid point, we get one equation with 5 unknowns for each grid location. If our grid has \( n \times m \) grid locations in it, then we have \( n \times m \) equations, each with 5 unknowns.
If you're wondering about what's happening at the edges, we're going to lazily side-step that question by making our grid wrap around: if you ask for the velocity past the bottom edge, you'll get a value near the top edge.
Before we move on, our notation is getting a bit clunky, so let's clean it up a tad since we know we're working on a grid. For the next part, we'll say \( p_{i,j} = p(i \epsilon, j \epsilon, t) \), and we'll stick all the known values together into a value \( d \) (for divergence), like so:
With this nicer notation, we can express the system of equations on pressure that we're trying to solve like so:
Iteratively Solving the Pressure Equation
Solving for \( p_{i, j} \) for every grid point analytically would be an enormous mess. Instead, we're going to use an iterative method of solving this system of equations, where each iteration provides values closer and closer to a real solution. We're going to use the Jacobi Method .
In the Jacobi method, we first rearrange our equation to isolate one term, like so:
Next, we make an initial guess for all of our unknowns. We'll call this initial guess \( p_{i,j}^{(0)} \), and just set it to 0 everywhere.
Here's where the iteration comes in: our next guess, \( p_{i, j}^{(1)} \) is obtained by plugging in our initial guess into the above formula:
And, more generally, each iteration relies upon the previous one:
You would usually run this until the values of one iteration are equal to the values from the previous iteration, rounded to a certain accuracy. For our purposes, we're more interested in this running in a consistent period of time, so we'll arbitrarily run this for 10 iterations, and hope the result is accurate enough to look realistic.
For a bit of intuition on why this converges to a solution, check out Algebraic Pavel's answer on Math Exchange .
Phew! That was a lot to get through. Now let's put it all together. Roughly, as pseudo-code, here's our whole simulation:
initialize color field, c initialize velocity field, u  while(true):     u_a := advect field u through itself     d := calculate divergence of u_a     p := calculate pressure based on d, using jacobi iteration     u := u_a - gradient of p     c := advect field c through velocity field u     draw c     wait a bit
Here are the key formulas for those steps on grid coordinates \( (i, j) \), uncluttered by derivations:
Advecting field \( vec u \) through itself:
Divergence of \( \vec u_a \) (multiplied by constant terms):
Pressure calculation Jacobi iteration step, with \( p_{i, j}^{(0)} = 0 \):
Subtracting the pressure gradient from the advected velocity field:
Advecting the color field through the final velocity field:
Pulling all those steps together, you can make something like this! Woohoo! When I got this working for the first time, I was pretty ecstatic.
I won't delve too far into the implementation, but you can have a look at it yourself: fluid-sim.js . It relies upon the elegant lightgl.js , which is an abstraction layer on top of WebGL that makes it much nicer to work with. Unlike THREE.js, it doesn't make any assumptions about you wanting any concept of a camera or lighting or that you're working in 3D at all.
The key technique for running the simulation efficiently is doing all the hard work on the GPU. To meet this need, all of the computations are done via the render to texture technique, ping-ponging which texture is being rendered to facilitate reading and writing to the same conceptual texture (e.g. reading from the velocity field and writing to the velocity field representing the next time step).
Each one of the major components of the algorithm is implemented in a separate shader. There's a shader for advection, a shader for calculating the divergence, one for a single iteration of the Jacobi method, and another for subtracting the pressure gradient from the advected velocity.
Fluid Simulation Course Notes from SIGGRAPH 2007 : Now a textbook, this is a pretty mathematically dense tutorial. It took me 4 or 5 times reading through most sections to make sense of it, and ultimately I only understood parts of it after I did the derivations myself. It uses the more complex conjugate gradient method instead of the Jacobi method to solve the system of pressure equations, which I got completely lost in, and abandoned. It delves into a lot of arguments about numerical accuracy and uses a more complex grid layout than I did, which I still don't follow fully. It also has resources for other kinds of fluid simulations, like heightfield simulation, and smoothed particle hydrodynamics.
GPU Gems Chapter 38.  Fast Fluid Dynamics Simulation on the GPU : This was the single most useful reference I found, and describes something very similar to this post.  It walks through specific implementation ideas, and gave me a much better intuition for advection. Some of the math (or at least the notation) seems shaky here. I think the Gaussian "splat" formula is missing a negative sign inside of the \( exp() \), and I'm not sure what the notation \( (\vec u \cdot \nabla) u_x \) means in the first Navier-Stokes equation, since \( \nabla \cdot \vec u = 0 \) in the second equation.
"Elementary Linear Algebra" by Ron Larson, Section 10.2: Iterative Methods for Solving Linear Systems . This had a much clearer explanation of the Jacobi method than the GPU Gems chapter that allowed me to derive the pressure solve iteration myself. The full textbook can be found here: "Elementary Linear Algebra" on amazon.com .
Jonas Wagner's fluid simulation on canvas , and particularly the source for it ( fluid.js ) were helpful for understanding what a full solution actually looks like. It's also how I found the GPU Gems article in the first place. Jonas went on later to reimplement his solution in WebGL: WebGL Fluid Simulation .
If you liked reading this, you should subscribe by email , follow me on Twitter ,   take a look at other blog posts by me , or if you'd like to chat in a non-recruiting capacity, DM me on Twitter.
Jump to navigation  Jump to search    Bending of an edge-clamped circular plate under the action of a transverse pressure.  The left half of the plate shows the deformed shape, while the right half shows the undeformed shape.  This calculation was performed using Ansys .
Bending of plates , or plate bending , refers to the deflection of a plate perpendicular to the plane of the plate under the action of external forces and moments .  The amount of deflection can be determined by solving the differential equations of an appropriate plate theory .  The stresses in the plate can be calculated from these deflections.  Once the stresses are known, failure theories can be used to determine whether a plate will fail under a given load.
For a thin rectangular plate of thickness  , Young's modulus   , and Poisson's ratio   , we can define parameters in terms of the plate deflection,  .
The flexural rigidity is given by
The bending moments per unit length are given by
The twisting moment per unit length is given by
The shear forces per unit length are given by
The bending stresses are given by
The shear stress is given by
The bending strains for small-deflection theory are given by
The shear strain for small-deflection theory is given by
For large-deflection plate theory, we consider the inclusion of membrane strains
The deflections are given by
In the Kirchhoff-Love plate theory for  plates the governing equations are [1]
where  is an applied transverse load per unit area, the thickness of the plate is  , the stresses are  , and
The quantity  has units of force per unit length.  The quantity  has units of moment per unit length.
For isotropic , homogeneous , plates with Young's modulus   and Poisson's ratio   these equations reduce to [2]
where  is the deflection of the mid-surface of the plate.
This is governed by the Germain - Lagrange plate equation
This equation was first derived by Lagrange in December 1811 in correcting the work of Germain who provided the basis of the theory.
This is governed by the Föppl - von Kármán  plate equations
where  is the stress function.
The bending of circular plates can be examined by solving the governing equation with  appropriate boundary conditions.  These solutions were first found by Poisson in 1829. Cylindrical coordinates are convenient for such problems. Here  is the distance of a point from the midplane of the plate.
The governing equation in coordinate-free form is
In cylindrical coordinates  ,
For symmetrically loaded circular plates,  , and we have
Therefore, the governing equation is
If  and  are constant, direct integration of the governing equation gives us
where  are constants.  The slope of the deflection surface is
For a circular plate, the requirement that the deflection and the slope of the deflection are finite  at  implies that  . However,  need not equal 0, as the limit  of  exists as you approach  from the right.
For a circular plate with clamped edges, we have  and  at the edge of the plate (radius  ).  Using these boundary conditions we get
The in-plane displacements in the plate are
The in-plane strains in the plate are
The in-plane stresses in the plate are
For a plate of thickness  , the bending stiffness is  and we have
The moment resultants (bending moments) are
The maximum radial stress is at  and  :
where  .  The bending moments at the boundary and the center of the plate are
Bending of a rectangular plate under the action of a distributed force  per unit area.
For rectangular plates, Navier in 1820 introduced a simple method for finding the displacement and stress when a plate is simply supported. The idea was to express the applied load in terms of Fourier components, find the solution for a sinusoidal load (a single Fourier component), and then superimpose the Fourier components to get the solution for an arbitrary load.
Let us assume that the load is of the form
Here  is the amplitude,  is the width of the plate in the  -direction, and  is the width of the plate in the  -direction.
Since the plate is simply supported, the displacement  along the edges of the plate is zero, the bending moment  is zero at  and  , and  is zero at  and  .
If we apply these boundary conditions and solve the plate equation, we get the solution
Where D is the flexural rigidity
Analogous to flexural stiffness EI. [3] We can calculate the stresses and strains in the plate once we know the displacement.
For a more general load of the form
where  and  are integers, we get the solution
We define a general load  of the following form
where  is a Fourier coefficient given by
The classical rectangular plate equation for small deflections thus becomes:
We assume a solution  of the following form
The partial differentials of this function are given by
Substituting these expressions in the plate equation, we have
Equating the two expressions, we have
which can be rearranged to give
The deflection of a simply-supported plate (of corner-origin) with general load is given by
Displacement and stresses along  for a rectangular plate with  mm,  mm,  mm,  GPa, and  under a load  kPa.  The red line represents the bottom of the plate, the green line the middle, and the blue line the top of the plate.
For a uniformly-distributed load, we have
The corresponding Fourier coefficient is thus given by
Evaluating the double integral, we have
or alternatively in a piecewise format, we have
The deflection of a simply-supported plate (of corner-origin) with uniformly-distributed load is given by
The bending moments per unit length in the plate are given by
Another approach was proposed by Lévy [4] in 1899.  In this case we start with an assumed form of the displacement and try to fit the parameters so that the governing equation and the boundary conditions are satisfied. The goal is to find  such that it satisfies the boundary conditions at  and  and, of course, the governing equation  .
Let us assume that
For a plate that is simply-supported along  and  , the boundary conditions are  and  . Note that there is no variation in displacement along these edges meaning that  and  , thus reducing the moment boundary condition to an equivalent expression  .
Consider the case of pure moment loading.  In that case  and  has to satisfy  .  Since we are working in rectangular Cartesian coordinates, the governing equation can be expanded as
Plugging the expression for  in the governing equation gives us
This is an ordinary differential equation which has the general solution
where  are constants that can be determined from the boundary  conditions.  Therefore, the displacement solution has the form
Let us choose the coordinate system such that the boundaries of the plate are at  and  (same as before) and at  (and not  and  ).  Then the moment boundary conditions at the  boundaries are
where  are known functions.  The solution can be found by  applying these boundary conditions.  We can show that for the symmetrical case where
Similarly, for the antisymmetrical case where
We can superpose the symmetric and antisymmetric solutions to get more general solutions.
For a uniformly-distributed load, we have
The deflection of a simply-supported plate with centre  with uniformly-distributed load is given by
The bending moments per unit length in the plate are given by
For the special case where the loading is symmetric and the moment is uniform, we have at  ,
Displacement and stresses for a rectangular plate under uniform bending moment along the edges  and  .  The bending stress  is along the bottom surface of the plate.  The transverse shear stress  is along the mid-surface of the plate.
The resulting displacement is
The bending moments and shear forces corresponding to the displacement  are
Cylindrical bending occurs when a rectangular plate that has dimensions  , where  and the thickness  is small, is subjected to a uniform distributed load perpendicular to the plane of the plate.  Such a plate takes the shape of the surface of a cylinder.
For a simply supported plate under cylindrical bending with edges that are free to rotate but have a fixed  .  Cylindrical bending solutions can be found using the Navier and Levy techniques.
For thick plates, we have to consider the effect of through-the-thickness shears on the orientation of the normal to the mid-surface after deformation. Raymond D. Mindlin's theory provides one approach for find the deformation and stresses in such plates.  Solutions to Mindlin's theory can be derived from the equivalent Kirchhoff-Love solutions using canonical relations. [5]
The canonical governing equation for isotropic thick plates can be expressed as [5]
where  is the applied transverse load,  is the shear modulus,  is the bending rigidity,  is the plate thickness,  ,  is the shear correction factor,  is the Young's modulus,  is the Poisson's  ratio, and
In Mindlin's theory,  is the transverse displacement of the mid-surface of the plate and the quantities  and  are the rotations of the mid-surface normal about the  and  -axes, respectively.  The canonical parameters for this theory are  and  .  The shear correction factor  usually has the value  .
The solutions to the governing equations can be found if one knows the corresponding  Kirchhoff-Love solutions by using the relations
where  is the displacement predicted for a Kirchhoff-Love plate,  is a  biharmonic function such that  ,  is a function that satisfies the  Laplace equation,  , and
For simply supported plates, the Marcus moment sum vanishes, i.e.,
In that case the functions  ,  ,  vanish, and the Mindlin solution is related to the corresponding Kirchhoff solution by
Reissner-Stein theory for cantilever plates [6] leads to the following coupled ordinary differential equations for a cantilever plate with concentrated end load  at  .
and the boundary conditions at  are
Solution of this system of two ODEs gives
where  .  The bending moments and shear forces corresponding to the displacement  are
The stresses are
If the applied load at the edge is constant, we recover the solutions for a beam under a concentrated end load.  If the applied load is a linear function of  , then
Creates a criterion that measures the Binary Cross Entropy between the target and the input probabilities:
The unreduced (i.e. with reduction set to 'none' ) loss can be described as:
where   N is the batch size. If reduction is not 'none' (default 'mean' ), then
This is used for measuring the error of a reconstruction in for example an auto-encoder. Note that the targets   y should be numbers between 0 and 1.
Notice that if   x  n ​ is either 0 or 1, one of the log terms would be mathematically undefined in the above loss equation. PyTorch chooses to set   lo g ( 0 ) =  − ∞ , since   lim  x → 0 ​ lo g ( x ) =  − ∞ . However, an infinite term in the loss equation is not desirable for several reasons.
For one, if either   y  n ​ =  0 or   ( 1 −  y  n ​ ) =  0 , then we would be multiplying 0 with infinity. Secondly, if we have an infinite loss value, then we would also have an infinite term in our gradient, since   lim  x → 0 ​   d x  d ​ lo g ( x ) =  ∞ . This would make BCELoss's backward method nonlinear with respect to   x  n ​ , and using it for things like linear regression would not be straight-forward.
Our solution is that BCELoss clamps its log function outputs to be greater than or equal to -100. This way, we can always have a finite loss value and a linear backward method.
( Tensor , optional ) - a manual rescaling weight given to the loss of each batch element. If given, has to be a Tensor of size nbatch
( bool , optional ) - Deprecated (see reduction ). By default, the losses are averaged over each loss element in the batch. Note that for some losses, there are multiple elements per sample. If the field size_average is set to False , the losses are instead summed for each minibatch. Ignored when reduce is False . Default: True
( bool , optional ) - Deprecated (see reduction ). By default, the losses are averaged or summed over observations for each minibatch depending on size_average . When reduce is False , returns a loss per batch element instead and ignores size_average . Default: True
( str , optional ) - Specifies the reduction to apply to the output: 'none' | 'mean' | 'sum' . 'none' : no reduction will be applied, 'mean' : the sum of the output will be divided by the number of elements in the output, 'sum' : the output will be summed. Note: size_average and reduce are in the process of being deprecated, and in the meantime, specifying either of those two args will override reduction . Default: 'mean'
Input:   ( ∗ ) , where   ∗ means any number of dimensions.
Target:   ( ∗ ) , same shape as the input.
Output: scalar. If reduction is 'none' , then   ( ∗ ) , same shape as input.
Built with Sphinx using a theme provided by Read the Docs .
© Copyright The Linux Foundation. The PyTorch Foundation is a project of The Linux Foundation.           For web site terms of use, trademark policy and other policies applicable to The PyTorch Foundation please see www.linuxfoundation.org/policies/ . The PyTorch Foundation supports the PyTorch open source           project, which has been established as PyTorch Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC. For policies applicable to the PyTorch Project a Series of LF Projects, LLC,           please see www.lfprojects.org/policies/ .
To analyze traffic and optimize your experience, we serve cookies on this site. By clicking or navigating, you agree to allow our usage of cookies. As the current maintainers of this site, Facebook's Cookies Policy applies. Learn more, including about available controls: Cookies Policy .
Find centralized, trusted content and collaborate around the technologies you use most.
Connect and share knowledge within a single location that is structured and easy to search.
Can you disable the auto decoding feature in requests version 1.2.3?
I've looked through the documentation and couldn't find anything, I'm currently experiencing a gzip decode error and want to manually debug the data coming through the request.
You can access the raw response like this:
In order to use raw you need to set stream=True for the original request. Also, raw is a file-like object, and reading from response.content will affect the seek cursor. In other words: If you already (tried to) read response.content , response.raw.read() will return an empty string.
See FAQ: Encoded Data and Quickstart: raw response content in the requests documentation.
This way, you will avoid automatic decompress of gzip-encoded response, and still write it to file chunk by chunk (useful for getting big files)
Thanks for contributing an answer to Stack Overflow!
Please be sure to answer the question . Provide details and share your research!
But avoid …
Asking for help, clarification, or responding to other answers.
Making statements based on opinion; back them up with references or personal experience.
To learn more, see our tips on writing great answers .
By clicking "Post Your Answer", you agree to our terms of service , privacy policy and cookie policy
Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged python
or ask your own question .
Our favorite apps, books, and games of 2023 (Ep. 524)
The Winter/Summer Bash 2022 Hat Cafe is now closed!
Should we burninate the [shipping] tag?
Can the encoding used to decompress the data automatically in Requests be altered?
Use python Requests to download an compressed tar.gzfile and unzip it using tar
How to download .gz files with requests in Python without decoding it?
Set up a scheduled job?
What are the differences between the urllib, urllib2, urllib3 and requests module?
How to POST JSON data with Python Requests?
How do I disable log messages from the Requests library?
How to download image using requests
Get file size using python-requests, while only getting the header
How do I disable the security certificate check in Python requests
Correct way to try/except using Python requests module?
Download large file in python with requests
How do we know the assumptions of the Schwarzschild solution are valid?
Did the Ontario College of Psychologists demand that Jordan P Peterson attend 'communication retraining'?
C++ code for a simple single header logging library
What caused "The Operative" to support Mal's team at the end of the movie?
Does any iPhone take advantage of higher current limits for USB Battery Charging ports?
Clamping electrical outlet to concrete wall without drilling?
What happened to Frodo's house at Crickhollow?
Optimize search for rational numbers on unit circle?
What does the word "until" in Exodus 12:6 mean?
What does trash from ISS consist of?
Is there a rotary controller that can detect both X and Y axis of motion?
Dawkins on God: What are the strongest counters to his argument?
OpenSSL AES-GCM says 'bad decrypt', other block modes work fine?
Hotel lost my clothes; sent them to my home; now I am being chased to pay for delivery
Can I use Log Loss to solve a non-linear Classification task?
n-digit primes given the first m digits
Can a cyclic group of prime order act on a rationally acyclic finite dimensional complex and have no fixed points?
Old, sew-ups French bike guy. Don't like foldable clincher tires
What is the purpose of the resistor in a RC circuit?
As a rogue, what are the most reliable ways to gain advantage on attacks?
Site design / logo © 2023 Stack Exchange Inc; user contributions licensed under CC BY-SA . rev 2023.1.5.43140
By clicking "Accept all cookies", you agree Stack Exchange can store cookies on your device and disclose information in accordance with our Cookie Policy .
Stack Exchange network consists of 181 Q&A communities including Stack Overflow , the largest, most trusted online community for developers to learn, share their knowledge, and build their careers.
Sign up or log in to customize your list.
Mathematics Stack Exchange is a question and answer site for people studying math at any level and professionals in related fields. It only takes a minute to sign up.
Anybody can ask a question
Anybody can answer
The best answers are voted up and rise to the top
- Start collaborating and sharing organizational knowledge.
Connect and share knowledge within a single location that is structured and easy to search.
$\begingroup$   In a scientific paper, I've seen the following
where $K$ is a $n \times n$ matrix that depends on $p$ . In my calculations I would have done the following
Is my calculation wrong?
Note: I think $K$ is symmetric.
$\begingroup$  It is wrong. Note: matrices do not commute in general. Respect the order when derivate.  $\endgroup$  - A.Γ.
$\begingroup$   The major trouble in matrix calculus is that the things are no longer commuting, but one tends to use formulae from the scalar function calculus like $(x(t)^{-1})'=-x(t)^{-2}x'(t)$ replacing $x$ with the matrix $K$. One has to be more careful here and pay attention to the order
. The easiest way to get the derivative of the inverse is to derivate the identity $I=KK^{-1}$ respecting the order $$ \underbrace{(I)'}_{=0}=(KK^{-1})'=K'K^{-1}+K(K^{-1})'. $$ Solving this equation with respect to $(K^{-1})'$ (again paying attention to the order (!)) will give $$ K(K^{-1})'=-K'K^{-1}\qquad\Rightarrow\qquad (K^{-1})'=-K^{-1}K'K^{-1}. $$
$\begingroup$  Looks like this also holds for total derivative with p being any parameter set, following the same derivation  $\endgroup$  - Yuri Feldman
$\begingroup$   Yes, your calculation is wrong, note that $K$ may not commute with $\frac{\partial K}{\partial p}$, hence you must apply the chain rule correctly. The derivative of $\def\inv{\mathrm{inv}}\inv \colon \def\G{\mathord{\rm GL}}\G_n \to \G_n$ is not
given by $\inv'(A)B = -A^2B$, but by $\inv'(A)B = -A^{-1}BA^{-1}$. To see that, note that for small enough $B$ we have  \begin{align*}   \inv(A + B) &= (A + B)^{-1}\\               &= (\def\I{\mathord{\rm Id}}\I + A^{-1}B)^{-1}A^{-1}\\               &= \sum_k (-1)^k (A^{-1}B)^kA^{-1}\\               &= A^{-1} - A^{-1}BA^{-1} + o(\|B\|)  \end{align*} Hence, $\inv'(A)B= -A^{-1}BA^{-1}$, and therefore, by the chain rule  $$ \partial_p (\inv \circ K) = \inv'\circ K\bigl(\partial_p K) = -K^{-1}(\partial_p K) K^{-1} $$
$\begingroup$  How does the second line follow from B being small enough?  $\endgroup$  - nbubis
$\begingroup$  @nbubis The Neumann series is $I - A = \sum_{k = 0}^{\infty} A^k$ for $\| A \| < 1$, which is analogous to the geometric series. Thus for small enough $B$ we have $\| A^{-1} B \| < 1$ and thus $(I + A^{-1} B)^{-1} = \sum_{k = 0}^{\infty} (-1)^k (A^{-k} B)^k$.  $\endgroup$  - Ramanujan
$\begingroup$   Actually, we can directly calculate the derivate of a matrix starting from the definition of the derivate of functions. In particular, \begin{align} \frac{dK^{-1}}{dp} & =\lim_{\Delta p \to 0} \frac{(K+\Delta K)^{-1} - K^{-1}}{\Delta p} \\ {} & = \lim_{\Delta p \to 0} \frac{(K+\Delta K)^{-1}KK^{-1} - (K+\Delta K)^{-1}(K+\Delta K)K^{-1}}{\Delta p}  \\  {} & = \lim_{\Delta p \to 0} \frac{(K+\Delta K)^{-1}(-\Delta K) K^{-1}}{\Delta p} \\  {} & = - K^{-1} \lim_{\Delta p \to 0} \frac{\Delta K}{\Delta p} K^{-1}  \\  {} & = - K^{-1} (\partial_{p} K) K^{-1} \end{align}
$\begingroup$   Another related method is to use differentials. $$ d\mathbf{K}^{-1}= -\mathbf{K}^{-1} (d\mathbf{K}) \mathbf{K}^{-1} $$ and $d\mathbf{K}= \frac{\partial \mathbf{K}}{\partial p} dp$ Thus $$ d\mathbf{K}^{-1}= -\left[\mathbf{K}^{-1} \frac{\partial \mathbf{K}}{\partial p} \mathbf{K}^{-1} \right] dp $$ from which it follows that $$ \frac{\partial \mathbf{K}^{-1}}{\partial p} = -\mathbf{K}^{-1} \frac{\partial \mathbf{K}}{\partial p} \mathbf{K}^{-1}  $$
You must log in to answer this question.
Not the answer you're looking for? Browse other questions tagged matrices
The Winter/Summer Bash 2022 Hat Cafe is now closed!
How to calculate $\dfrac{\partial a^{\rm T}A^{-\rm T}bb^{\rm T}A^{-1}a}{\partial A}$?
Differentiation of solution to time-dependent system of equations: Problem 2-15(c) from Spivak's Calculus on Manifolds
My bathroom slab is 2 inches lower than the rest of the homes slab. How should I level it?
Would it be legal for a business to provide only unisex multi person restrooms for use?
How did the Death Star 2 stay in orbit above Endor when it did not have functional ion engines nor a functional hyperdrive system?
How to Draw this Method of Disk for Shell Revolution?
What is the process for nominating a Speaker of the House?
Old, sew-ups French bike guy. Don't like foldable clincher tires
C++ code for a simple single header logging library
How good are last year's model bikes
Signal - Can message previews of the messages you send be disable in the chats' list of your addressee?
Will the Artemis Gateway Lunar Space Station be visible from Earth by amateur observers?
Does any iPhone take advantage of higher current limits for USB Battery Charging ports?
Is there any recourse if a defendant was found guilty due to an unknowingly false claim made by a juror during deliberations swaying jurors?
Would fewer cows mean less methane emission?
Prisoners' right to vote in international standards
LTspice: simulating the bounce effect of a push button
What if no Speaker is elected by Jan 6th after a presidential election?
Important improvements of LaTeX over the last ten years (2013-2022)
Encrypted instead of signed access tokens in OAuth2
Remove duplicates from my academic transcript
What are some interesting applications/corollaries of Kleene's Recursion theorem?
Can an n-dimensional being hurt an (n+x)-dimensional being?
My dead mom left behind some number code. I can't figure out what it means. Is anyone able to help?
Find the average of the letters in the list
Question feed To subscribe to this RSS feed, copy and paste this URL into your RSS reader.
Site design / logo © 2023 Stack Exchange Inc; user contributions licensed under CC BY-SA . rev 2023.1.5.43140
By clicking "Accept all cookies", you agree Stack Exchange can store cookies on your device and disclose information in accordance with our Cookie Policy .
Question feed To subscribe to this RSS feed, copy and paste this URL into your RSS reader.
- Start collaborating and sharing organizational knowledge.
Sign up or log in to customize your list.
Stack Overflow for Teams  Where developers & technologists share private knowledge with coworkers
Talent  Build your employer brand
Advertising  Reach developers & technologists worldwide
This page was last edited on 21 October 2022, at 07:59 (UTC) .
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License 3.0 ; additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization.